The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Vee-Boers, by Mayne Reid

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Vee-Boers
       A Tale of Adventure in Southern Africa

Author: Mayne Reid

Illustrator: H. Petherick

Release Date: December 15, 2010 [EBook #34667]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE VEE-BOERS ***




Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England




The Vee-Boers
A Tale of Adventure in Southern Africa
By Captain Mayne Reid
Published by George Routledge and Sons Ltd, London
This edition dated 1907

The Vee-Boers, by Captain Mayne Reid.

________________________________________________________________________

________________________________________________________________________
THE VEE-BOERS, BY CAPTAIN MAYNE REID.



CHAPTER ONE.

ON THE KAROO.

A vast plain, seemingly bounded but by the horizon; treeless, save where
a solitary _cameel-doorn_ [Note 1] spreads its feathered leaves, or a
clump of arborescent aloes, mingled with rigid-stemmed euphorbias,
breaks the continuity of its outline.  These types of desert vegetation
but proclaim its sterility, which is further evinced by tufts of
whiteish withered grass, growing thinly between them.

Over it three waggons are moving; immense vehicles with bodies above
four yards in length, surrounded by an arching of bamboo canes covered
with canvas.  To each is attached eight pairs of long-horned oxen, with
a driver seated on the box, who flourishes a whip, in length like a
fishing-rod; another on foot alongside, wielding the terrible _jambok_,
while at the head of the extended team marches the "foreloper," _reim_
in hand, guiding the oxen along the track.

Half a score horsemen ride here and there upon the flanks, with three
others in advance; and bringing up the rear is a drove of milch cows--
some with calves at the foot--and a flock of _fat-tailed_ sheep, their
tails full fifty pounds in weight, and trailing on the ground.

The cows and sheep are in charge of ten or a dozen dark-skinned
herdsmen, most of them all but naked; while a like number of large
wolfish-looking dogs completes the list of living things visible outside
the waggons.  But, were the end curtains raised, under their tilts would
be seen women with children--of both sexes and all ages--in each the
members of a single family, its male head excepted.

Of the last there are three, corresponding to the number of the waggons,
of which they are the respective proprietors--the three men riding in
advance.  Their names, Jan Van Dorn, Hans Blom, and Klaas Rynwald.  All
Dutch names, and Dutch are they who bear them, at least by descent, for
the scene _is_ Southern Africa, and they are _Boers_.

Not of the ordinary class, though, as may be told by their large
accompaniment of unattached cattle and sheep--over a hundred of the
former, and three times as many of the latter.  These, with other signs
well-known to South Africans, proclaim them to be Vee-Boers [Note 2].

They are far away from any settlement of civilised or white men, the
nearest being their own frontier town, Zoutpansberg, in the Transvaal,
from which they are distant full three hundred miles northward.  Nor are
they in Transvaalian territory, but that of the Tebele, beyond the
Limpopo river, and journeying on north.

Why they are there calls for explanation, and a word will suffice.  The
world has of late heard much of the Transvaal Republic and its brave
people; how distasteful to them was annexation to the English
Government; indeed, so repugnant, that many plucked up the rooftrees
they had but lately planted, and were off again, scarce thinking or
caring whither, so long as they got beyond the reach of British rule.

It is on record--a painful one--that many of those political fugitives
passed through hardships scarce conceivable, and not a few perished by
the way--miserably perished, the victims of fatigue, hunger, and thirst.
And it is of just such a party we purpose giving account of, their
journeyings, adventures, and dangers, by flood and by field.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The time was just after the annexation, and our Vee-Boers, as introduced
to the reader, were weeks away from their abandoned homes in the
Transvaal.

That they had permission to enter the territory of the Tebele, might be
taken for granted, otherwise they would have been on dangerous ground.
For its powerful and despotic chief was not the man to allow intrusion
into his dominions, even by peaceful travellers.

But they had his leave, backed by invitation, not only to pass through,
but make permanent home in them, if they wished.  Jan Van Dorn, the
"_baas_" [Note 3] of the migrating party, an old _jager_, had, in bygone
days, hunted all over the Tebele country, smoked the pipe of peace with
Moselekatse himself, and so established a friendship still existing.  In
one of his expeditions he had discovered a magnificent grazing country--
a very paradise for the Vee-Boer--and it was for this they were now
making.

They were journeying by night, or rather early morning, before daybreak.
It was not their habit to lie late; but just then they had more than
one reason for being up betimes and moving.  It was in the Torrid Zone,
where travelling by day is oft a very torture, especially over a plain
such as that they were crossing.

They had entered upon a track of _karoo_ [Note 4], which they knew to
extend for more than 100 miles; treeless, shadeless, and without water,
save here and there in pools, or natural cisterns, at long distances
apart.  Besides, no rain had fallen on it for months, and like as not
the water reservoirs would all be dried up.  Not strange, then, their
travelling by night, as by day; for it was life or death to them to get
across the karoo.

Luckily they were favoured by moonlight, with stars in a clear,
unclouded sky, which insured them against straying from the practicable
route.  And as their guide, a Hottentot, by name Smutz knew every inch
of it, they had confidence in his piloting.

So on they moved, noiselessly, save when now and then crack of whip, the
sharp snap of a _jambok_ [Note 5], or the ejaculations of the men
wielding this formidable instrument of animal torture, disturbed the
stillness of the night.  More rarely was it broken by the rumble of
wheels, these for the most part being fellies deep in soft, yielding
sand.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  The "cameel-doorn," literally, camel-thorn, is a species of
acacia, whose tender shoots and leaves are the favourite food of the
cameleopard, or giraffe.  It is a common and characteristic tree in most
districts of southern Africa, having pinnate leaves, and, like most of
the acacia tribe, bright yellow blossoms.

Note 2.  "Vee-boers" are distinguished from other Boers by their special
employment being the grazing and raising of cattle.  To this they devote
themselves exclusively, as the _stockmen_ of Australia, and the
_ranchmen_ of Western America.  They have no fixed habitation, flitting
about from place to place with their flocks wherever the pasture tempts
them, and making house and home of their huge _trek-waggons_, just as
the "cheap jacks" of England.  They have tents also, and sometimes erect
rude huts.

Note 3.  "Baas," master.  It is synonymous with the "boss" of the
Southern United States, which, no doubt, was carried thither by the
slave negroes who had had dealings with the Dutch of South Africa.

Note 4.  The "karoos" of Southern Africa may be compared with our
moorlands, only more extended in area, and with a different sort of
vegetation.  Heaths of many beautiful species are among their
characteristic plants, as all may know who take a pride in the keeping
of hothouses.

Note 5.  The "jambok," or "schambok," is an elastic whip, all stock and
no lash, or if you like, _vice versa_.  Some six feet long, it tapers
from a butt of about an inch in diameter to the tiniest tip; and, when
forcibly laid on, will make _weals_ on the skin of a horse, and cut that
of a man clean through.  It is a cruel instrument of torture, and, I
regret to say, not exclusively employed to punish animals, as the
natives of South Africa too well know.  To threaten a disobedient
servant with the jambok--be he Hottentot, Fingo, or Caffre--is to bring
him back to kneeling obeisance.  The best jamboks are made of
hippopotamus hide.



CHAPTER TWO.

A WEIRD SPECTACLE.

Going at a slow crawl in profound silence, the huge vehicles, with their
dark bodies and white tilts, the long serried line of yoked oxen
extended in advance of them, would have presented a strange mystifying
spectacle to one not knowing what it was.  Weird and ghostlike under the
silvery light of the moon, a native of the country, where such had never
been seen before, viewing it from a distance, might have imagined it
some monster of a world unknown.

But before morning came, the travellers were themselves witnesses of a
spectacle common enough in that same district, yet, in seeming, quite as
strange and mysterious as that of the waggon-train.

Proceeding in the opposite direction, and at no great distance off,
appeared a number of dark forms, one following the other in single file.
Immense creatures they were; each nearly as large as any of the
waggons, but, unlike these, living and breathing.  For they were
elephants--a troop on the march--nigh threescore in number, their line
extending for hundreds and hundreds of yards across the karoo.  They
were passing on silent as spectres, the tread of the ponderous pachyderm
being noiseless as that of a cat.  Even on stony ground it is scarce
distinguishable at the shortest distance, and on that sand-bestrewed
plain it made not the slightest sound to betray their presence.

Adding to their spectral appearance were the long, withered grass-tufts
and karoo bushes, white as if coated with hoar frost.  These concealing
their stride, they seemed to glide along as boats upon water, propelled
by some invisible agency, acting underneath.

To the Vee-Boers, as much hunters as herdsmen, it was a tempting,
tantalising sight, and under other circumstances the silence of the
night would have been broken by the cracking of shots.  But they knew
that to attack the elephants might infuriate and bring them in charge
upon the waggon-train, which would surely be its destruction.  [Note 1.]
So they resisted the temptation, and let the herd pass on; the two
parties, silent and weird-like as ever, gradually widening the space
between, till at length they were beyond sight of one another.

Soon after daylight declared itself; but it brought no rest to the now
wearied wayfarers--not even when the sun had risen high above the
horizon.  For they had failed to come across any water, and halting
without that were worse than keeping on.  Already suffering from thirst,
it would but prolong their suffering to make stop or stay.

Several of the so-called cisterns, or natural tanks, had been passed,
and as many pools, but all were dry, or with only just enough moisture
to keep the mud in their bottoms.  Remaining by these would be rest
neither to them nor the animals, now needing water as much or more than
themselves.

Another element also contributed to their torture--heat.  As the sun
mounted higher in the firmament, this became excessive; so sultry that
men and animals were perspiring at every pore; while on the ground, hot
as the floor of a baker's oven, it was painful to set foot.

The shoeless natives--Hottentots and Caffres alike--suffered especially,
notwithstanding the soles of their feet being callous, and hard as horn.
Some were seen to adopt a singular plan for keeping them cool--by a
plaster of mud, taken from the waterless but still moist pools, applying
it poultice-fashion, and at intervals damping them with the juice of the
euphorbia, and other succulent plants.

Equally odd, and more amusing, was the behaviour of the dogs.  They
would make a rush ahead of the waggons; dive under a bush, tussock of
grass, or anything giving shade; and there lie panting till the train
got past.  Then, rising reluctantly, they would stand for a time
contemplating the heated surface of sand, afraid to set paw upon it;
whine piteously; and finally, with a plunge, start off afresh, dash past
the waggons, and repeat the performance as before.

Thus on over the sun-parched plain moved the party of migrant Boers; but
not now silent as in the night.  What with oxen bellowing, cows lowing
in response to their bawling calves, sheep bleating, and dogs howling,
there was noise enough, and a surfeit of it.

And mingling with these cries of distress, at intervals came the crack
of a whip, loud as the report of a pistol, and the shouts of the drivers
urging their oxen on.

As if to add to their difficulty, they had entered upon a tract thickly
overgrown with _waaght-een-beetje_ [Note 2]; while those of them who
were on foot, had their ankles lacerated by the "_grapple-plant_."
[Note 3.]

Retarded by these various obstructions, they made but slow progress;
less than three miles an hour--the orthodox rate of speed made by South
African travellers "on trek;" and it had come to be a struggle painful
as it was perilous.  Fearfully dispiriting too; since they knew not when
or how it was to end.  Their sole hope rested on a large pond or lake
their guide told them of, and which he had never known to go dry.  But
it was still over ten miles distant, which meant at least four hours of
time--an appalling prospect in their then condition; men, horses, and
oxen, all athirst, all tottering in their steps.  There was no help for
it, no alternative, but keep on; and on they kept.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  Elephants often march in single file--indeed, it is their
common way--the sagacity of these animals telling them they are thus
less exposed to danger.  Often, too, a party of hunters, especially
Vee-Boers, well acquainted with the habits of the great pachyderms, will
allow them to pass unmolested, to be pursued and attacked farther on.  A
charge of infuriated elephants on a camp might result in its wholesale
destruction.

Note 2.  "Waaght-een-beetje" is the Dutch synonym for "Wait-a-bit."  The
tree or bush, so quaintly designated, is another of the many species of
South African acacias having spines sharp as fish-hooks and so set as to
hold on whatever they have caught, requiring skill, with an expenditure
of time, to get clear of them.  It is the _acacia detinens_ of the
botanists.

Note 3.  The "Grapple-plant" (uncaria procumbens) is a creeper, with
beautiful purple blossoms and a fruit beset with hooked spines that
readily catch on to the clothes, or even the skin.  It is very
troublesome to the barefooted natives who may have occasion to pass over
ground where it grows.



CHAPTER THREE.

A BATTUE OF LIONS.

It was well on in the afternoon when the travellers perceived a dark
belt rising above the plain at a long distance off, but directly on
their line of march.  A glad sight to their eyes, as they could tell it
to be timber, and knew they would there find the _vley_ [Note 1] of
which their guide had fore-warned them.  The prospect of water, shade,
and rest, all at the same time, and all so much needed, inspired them to
renewed speed; and the ponderous waggons seemed to move more lightly
along, while their conductors were merrier--drivers, after jambok men,
and forelopers.  Even the dumb animals, becoming infected with the same
spirit, partook of the general rejoicing, as though they also knew that
relief was near.

Yet was it far off as ever.  The promise that cheered them was not to be
fulfilled.  On reaching the timber at the point where the vley was, or
should have been, they found this too dried up, as all the others.  In
its bed were only pebbles and white sand, from which were reflected the
rays of the setting sun, as from a sheet of frosted snow!  So much for
their hopes of water; and as for shade, the trees proved to be _mopanes_
[Note 2] whose leaves grow vertically on the branches, and, like the
eucalypti of Australia, afford no more protection from the sun than
would a network of wire!

Nor was this the worst.  Scarce had they come to a stop by the wood's
edge, when they heard issuing out of it a noise well-known both to
themselves and their animals, and by both equally dreaded.  For it was
the roar of the lion; not one lion, but more like a score of them,
roaring together, as if each was doing its best to outroar all the rest.
The place appeared to be infested with the formidable brutes--a very
lair of them; and the fearful fracas they were making caused horses,
oxen, cows--in short, every four-footed creature in the train to dance
affrightedly about as though no longer feeling fatigue.  To ordinary
travellers the noise, with its attendant dangers, would have been
appalling; and even among them there was momentary alarm.  But they were
Boers of the Transvaal, of courage proverbial and historic; still more,
Vee-Boers, who are as much hunters as graziers, and little regard to the
lion's roar.  It was only because of there being such a chorus of it,
that they were for a time taken back.

Soon recovering themselves, however, there was a general rush towards
the waggons, in which they habitually kept their _roers_ [Note 3]; when,
each armed himself with one of these long guns, front was made to the
foe, still giving tongue, though as yet unseen.

Not for long were the lions chary about putting in an appearance.  Soon
their tawny skins were seen glistening among the trunks of the mopanes
zigzagging from point to point, and at each slant drawing nigher to the
spot where the waggons had drawn up.

It was now seen that there were quite twenty of them, or more; while the
intonation of their cries--full of fury and menace--told of the intended
attack.  Had they made it on the moment, and simultaneously, it would
have been all up with the travellers--at the very least would there have
been wholesale destruction among their animals.

But, luckily for them, the lion does not always attack on the instant;
more often making approach progressively, and with the caution of the
common cat, as most others of the _felidae_.  Probably had the prey they
contemplated springing on been a party of naked natives, with no other
defence than their skin shields, the _leeuws_ [Note 4] would have acted
differently.  But seeing before them that strange array--the waggons
with their white tilts, a spectacle in all likelihood new to them--it
was but natural they should feel shy about beginning the assault.  It
could not be actual fear, a feeling unknown to the African lion, in
those districts where it is unaccustomed to meet the white man, with his
death-dealing weapons; more like was it mystification at sight of the
huge vehicles larger than elephants, and which, for all the lions knew,
might be also living things, and far more dangerous.

Whether from this, or whatever cause, the great felines hesitated to
make approach, though gradually drawing nigher, as the confidence became
strengthened by their receiving no hurt from the singular monsters that
had intruded upon their domain.

This up to a certain moment; then they were saluted by a sound louder
than that they were themselves making, as the Vee-Boers poured a volley
upon them, which silenced half their number, by dropping them dead in
their tracks.

The rest did not retreat, but stood their ground, to all appearance more
mystified than ever.  They had heard thunder, and seen lightning, but
never with an accompaniment of smoke, such as they now saw, wondering
what it all meant.  And while still unresolved, and hesitating how to
act, the thick blue mist, which for a while had screened them, drifted
aside, to be replaced by another and similar screen as the reloaded raw
blazed forth again.

After the second volley, only two or three live lions remained upon the
ground; these seeming wounded, as they went limping off among the
mopanes.

For the Vee-Boers it was a victory easier than they had anticipated; and
over Royalty itself--a _battue_ of grandest game, the kings of beasts.

On gathering up the slain, they found fifteen of the _leeuws_, young and
old, male and female, six being lions, the rest lionesses.

The reason for so many having congregated there was the drought.  Up
till a late period there had been wafer in the vley, making it a
rendezvous for buffaloes, antelopes, and other ruminants; many skeletons
of which lay around, with bones clean picked--the work of these same
lions, and other carnivora.  But in time instinct had directed the
cud-chewing animals to repair to other places, where the water was of
surer supply; while the predatory species, more able to bear thirst, and
hunger too, had stayed behind.  Hence such a number found crowding
together; and their having been for some time without food--indeed,
half-famished, as it proved on examination of their carcases--will
account for their uniting to attack the travellers--an attempt so
cleverly and completely foiled.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  "Vley."  The synonym in Dutch for a lake of limited extent--a
pond, or pool.

Note 2.  The "mopane" is a tree belonging to the family of "banhinias,"
with pinnate leaves set point upwards, so that the sun glints down
between, and scarce any shade is given by the tree, even when in full
foliage.

Note 3.  "Roer."  The sort of gun in common use among the South African
Dutch.  It is a single barrel of great length and carry far.

Note 4.  "Leeuw."  The Boers' name for the "king of beasts."



CHAPTER FOUR.

THE TULP.

Meanwhile the waggons had been left standing just as they drew up, the
oxen still under yoke.  And now came the question, whether to "outspann"
[Note 1], or not.

It was but of short debate, however, as all were convinced of the
uselessness of remaining there.  Indeed more than useless; since they
would only be wasting time; and, thirsting as they were, that meant
everything.  Besides, their guide knew of another vley some miles
farther on, where he had still better hopes of finding water--now their
greatest want.  The heat no longer discomforted them, as the sun had got
low, and the atmosphere become as cool as they cared for.  They might
expect moonlight, too, as on the night before, which would also be in
their favour.  So, tired though they were, it was determined to trek on.

While this resolve was being arrived at, an incident occurred which was
calculated to make them thankful they had not already out-spanned.
Indeed, as they soon after came to know, it was rather a fortunate
circumstance their finding the vley dried up.  Had there been water in
it, they would surely have stayed there all night, to discover next
morning that their horses and oxen would not be worth taking farther--
even unable to take themselves.  Their milch kine would also have been
sacrificed, as in reality were their sheep, to the last hoof.  Luckily
all but the sheep escaped, though with the driven cattle, milk cows, and
their calves, it was the closest of shaves.  In that grove--for it was a
wood of only a few score acres in extent--there was a something even
more dangerous than lions, at least to grass-eating animals.  A plant it
was which grew under the mopanes, green as a leek, and not unlike one in
its leafage, covering the ground thickly, as onions in a garden bed.
The Vee-Boers knew the plant well--too well--and, but for their
attention being absorbed by the encounter with the lions, would long
before have observed it.  As it was, they only became aware of its
presence on seeing their sheep--that had been left for a time to
themselves--greedily browsing upon it.  The _lanigers_ were hungry as
wolves, and would have eaten anything green that chanced in their way;
so the whole flock, as soon as getting up to the wood's edge, had rushed
in among the trees, open-mouthed at what seemed a tempting morsel.

It was the _baas_ of the travelling party--Jan Van Dorn himself--who
first perceived the danger, and sounded the alarm, crying out--

"Oh, brothers!  We've lost our sheep!  See what they're feeding on; it's
the _tulp_!"  [Note 2.]

They thus addressed, needed no further explanation of a word which to
the reader may be unintelligible.  For there was not a man of them but
knew what the _tulp_ was, and its poisonous nature--possibly not one
whose herds and flocks had not some time or other been decimated by it.

Soon as it was seen how things stood, there was a rush in among the
mopanes, a surrounding of the sheep, and a chorus of shouts, as they
were driven out again to open ground.  But all too late, as every one
seemed to be aware; and when at length the forward movement was about
being resumed, it became a subject of discussion whether it would be
worth while taking these animals along.

Still there was a hope that, however faint, some of them might survive,
and leaning upon this, along were they taken; their owners making all
haste to depart from a spot alike dangerous in its _flora_ as its
_fauna_.

Once more was there a cracking of whips, and the oxen, straightening out
along the _trek-touw_ [Note 3], moved reluctantly on.

And now the moon, as had been anticipated, giving a bright light, the
travellers made good way; before midnight arriving at the second vley,
where fortunately there was still a _soupcon_ of water.  It was not
visible above the surface of sand that formed the vley's bed; but on
examination, several cavities were discovered in which appeared the much
wished-for element, that had been hollowed out by the hoofs of quaggas
and zebras.  Writers talk of instinct teaching these animals to dig
their own drinking wells; but the teaching in reality comes from a
process of reasoning-intelligence, as that of man himself.  All
naturalists know that, as indeed ought every one who owns dog or cat,
and has observed either spring up to a door-handle, making attempt with
manifest design to draw the door open.

Now, thirsting like sponges, the travellers out-spanned, and speedily.
All hands that could be spared from looking after the cattle set about
sinking a pit in the sand; into which, soon came water enough for all
their needs.

It required caution, however, with much shouting, and wielding of
jamboks, to keep the animals out of it.  The scent of the water had
reached their nostrils, an attraction irresistible, and horses neighed,
yoke-oxen bellowed, cows groaned in chorus with their bawling calves,
all madly eager to wet their muzzles, and quench their thirst that had
so long tortured them.

But the Vee-Boers, accustomed to such display, knew the precautions to
be taken; so kept the impatient creatures under restraint and aloof, at
length giving them to drink, from the "rush-buckets" [Note 4], which
were part of their _impedimenta_.

Their own thirst satisfied, then that of their stock, supper was eaten
heartily, and they retired to rest and sleep.  Not all, however; nearly
a third of their number remaining awake, and on the alert, as guards of
the camp.  They had no fear of their animals wandering away, fatigued as
these were.  Even had it been otherwise, and ever so fresh, their
straying would have been little apprehended.  For _on trek_, horses and
cattle--in short all domesticated quadrupeds--regard the great waggons
as they would the houses of a homestead, and will return to them just
the same.  Instinct--or, from what has been said above, rather reason--
admonishes them that beside these is their best place, safest from the
attack of predatory beasts--above all, from the lion, the real
_bete-noir_ of South African cattle.

Those of our travelling party had been sufficiently frightened at their
last halting-place, to keep them cowed, and tame, for at least
twenty-four hours after; and just so were they, starting and trembling
at every cry of wild creature that reached their ears--even at that of
the cowardly hyaena.

And here they heard lions too, though none came near.  At this vley,
still affording enough water to attract fat quaggas, zebras, and
gemsboks, the tawny monsters needed not whetting their teeth on tame
cattle, lean and tough as those of the Vee-Boers had got to be.

So the night passed by without further disturbance or adventure; day
broke again; breakfast was eaten; the oxen invoked; and the journey over
the _karoo_ continued.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  "Outspann."  The word has a general meaning, and refers not
only to detaching the animals from the vehicles, but making halt either
temporarily or for the night.

Note 2.  "Tulp."  The Dutch name for "tulip," of which it is but an
abbreviated form.  The plant itself is so called from its resemblance to
the tulip, both in leaf and flower.  It is of the iris family, and the
genus _morosa_.

Note 3.  "Trek-touw."  The long cable-like rope of raw hide continuing
the "tongue," or pole, of the waggons, and to which the forward pairs of
oxen are attached.  They are also made fast to it at night, when there
is any fear of their straying from the camp.

Note 4.  The "milk-baskets" of the Caffres are frequently in use among
the Vee-Boers, when on trek, their lightness making them more convenient
than vessels of a heavier kind.  They are made of the stems of a species
of "cyperus," a rush allied to the "Paper-reed," sewed so closely
together that when dry they will hold water.  The Caffres use them as
milk pails, and, when emptied, their dogs are allowed to lick them
clean.  The cleaning is still further carried out by an insect--a
species of cockroach (_Blatta_), which eats what remains of the milk
from the interstices between the rushes.  So important are these roaches
regarded for this purpose, that a Caffre on erecting a new hut, will
take his milk-baskets into an old one, and, as soon as a sufficient
number of the insects have entered them, will carry the vessels back to
where their services are required.

The Vee-Boers--by Captain Mayne Reid



CHAPTER FIVE.

UNDER THE MOWANA.

Three waggons drawn up under the shade of a gigantic _mowana_ [Note 1]--
the waggons of the Vee-Boers after their long, toilsome, and perilous
journey across the _karoo_.  They are again out-spanned, but now in
_laager_, which tells of an intention to remain there for some little
time.  The vehicles are set in such fashion as to enclose a rectangular
space, open at one end; while around them, at some distance off, a
circular fence of thorny bushes roughly form a _chevaux-de-frise_, to
hinder lions, hyaenas, and other marauders from approaching too near.
Seemingly, the ground has been judiciously chosen, with an eye to the
three chief requisites of a camp--grass, wood, and water.  It is
contiguous to the bank of a clear, running stream, on each side fringed
with a belt of timber, trees of many different kinds; while landward,
far as eye can reach, extends an open _veldt_, [Note 2], grass-covered,
and affording plenteous pasturage for their cattle.  These are all now
on it; oxen and milch-kine; the horses, too, hoppled neck-and-knee, to
keep them from straying.  But just now there is little fear of that, the
animals not yet having recovered from the Karoo journey, and all are
browsing tranquilly.

The sheep are not there--not one of them.  If looked for, they would be
found--or rather their carcases--lying here and there along the line of
yesterday's trek; though, like as not, even the carcases would not be
there, only the skins and bones; the flesh long since devoured by
jackals, hyenas, and vultures.

In addition to wood, water, and grass, the camp-ground enjoys another
convenience--in tropical Africa, nearly as essential as any of the
three--shade.  The _mowana_, [Note 3], with its wide extending arms, and
thickly set foliage, casts shadow over a circle of full fifty yards
diameter, and underneath it there is room for everybody and everything.

The hour is ten o'clock in the morning; the travellers having arrived
there in the afternoon of the preceding day.  That they have not been
idle since can be told by the work done.  The laager-fence itself must
have cost time and labour in its construction; while inside it are other
evidences of industry.  Much of the lading of the waggons is out, and on
the ground, to be re-packed and re-arranged for further transport; while
upon lines, stretched from tree to tree, hang all sorts of _lingerie_ in
the process of drying; proof that the washerwomen of the party had been
up and stirring betimes.

And this work, with many other kinds, is still in progress; not only the
women and girls, but the men and boys being actively engaged one way or
another.  Some of the older hands are repairing saddles, bridles, and
harness-gear; others mend _vel-schoenen_ [Note 4]; and still others look
to the waggon-wheels, whose spokes and fellies, contracted by the
drought, have been for some time threatening to part company.  A lapping
of wet raw hide, when it dries, will bind, and hold them together, firm
as any clasp or screw of iron; this every South African traveller knows,
and none better than a Vee-Boer.

Some of the women are occupied with their needles, which they ply with a
skill not excelled by the most accomplished Parisian _coturiere_; others
milk the cows, led inside the laager for this purpose, while yet others
are engaged in preparing the _morgen-maal_ [Note 5].  It is being cooked
on a kitchen-range, of quaint, primitive kind, such as may be met with
only in Southern Africa.  Hand of man has had nought to do with its
manufacture, nor has there been any iron employed in it.  Instead, it is
an earthen structure; part mud, and part a gummy, glutinous substance
secreted by insects, these having been its constructors.  For the
cooking-stove in question, is neither more nor less than an ant-hill,
the home of a hive of _termites_ [Note 6] of which there are several
near.  For some reason or other abandoned by its builders, it has been
easily transformed to the use now made of it.  On the night before, a
number of cavities had been hollowed out around its base, fires kindled
therein, and tires of shelves cut into the sides above them.  Now, at
ten am, the whole mass is at furnace heat, kettles boiling, stewpots
simmering, and frying-pans hissing--in short, a complete _batterie de
cuisine_ in stridulous activity.

One unaccustomed to Transvaalian cookery might not greatly relish the
viands in preparation; the meat part of them being mostly antelope
flesh, fried in lard rendered from the tails of the fat-tailed sheep.
None of it, however, came from those lately poisoned by the tulp, the
travellers having previously laid in a supply, sufficient to last them
to the end of their contemplated journey.  For the lard in question is a
staple commodity among the Dutch colonists of South Africa, kept in
stock not only in their houses, but carried with them in their waggons
when on trek.  It is often used as a substitute for butter, and however
distasteful to the palate of strangers, by the Boers it is regarded of
first _gout_.

And now the savoury steam, exhaling from the pots and pans, fills the
air with a fragrance more agreeable to the nostrils of the travellers
than all the odours of Araby.  So appetising is it, that all are madly
impatient to partake of the _morgen-maal_.

This they do as soon as culinary operations are ended, coffee being an
accompaniment to the more substantial dishes.  After which the white men
of the party indulge in a "soupie" of _brandeywyn_ [Note 7] winding up
with a smoke; when all return to the tasks of the day.  The children
alone remain idle at play; some of the most courageous boys climbing up
among the branches of the mowana, for the tempting fruit seen there.
But the work of none is now of long continuance, only up till about
twelve noon.  Then it is necessarily suspended on account of the sultry
heat, and all congregate under the mowana; the animals seeking shade
beneath other umbrageous trees that stand by the side of their pasture
ground.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  "Mowana" is the South African synonym for the "baobab"
(_Adansonia digitata_).

Note 2.  "Veldt" is a tract of grassy plain or prairie.  It is in part
synonymous with our word "field," which we have changed from its ancient
form, and partly from its signification.

Note 3.  As all know, the mowana, or baobab, is one of the largest of
trees; specimens being met with having a girth of nearly 100 feet.  It
is not proportionately tall, however--nothing like the _sequoias_ of
California.  Its leaves dried and pulverised are used as an antidote to
various diseases, as diarrhoea, fevers, etc.  Its fruit is slightly
acid, but well-flavoured, and is eaten by the natives of tropical
Africa.  The mowana is essentially a tree of the tropics.

Note 4.  "Vel-Schoenen."  Literally "skin shoes."  They are made of
untanned hide and sewed with thongs of the same.  They are worn by many
Boers, though it is their Hottentot servants who make and mend them.
One of these yellow-skinned cobblers will make a pair of Vel-Schoenen in
less than a couple of hours.

Note 5.  The "morgen-maal" (morning meal) of the Cape Dutch is a more
substantial repast than an ordinary English breakfast, being quite as
much a dinner.  The hour for eating it is about eleven am; but there is
usually an earlier _dejeuner_ consisting of a cup of coffee, and a slice
of bread, or cake.

Note 6.  The "termites," or white ants as more commonly called, often
make their "hills" as large as good-sized hay cocks, to which they bear
a strong resemblance.  It is quite a common thing for _Trek_ or _Vee_
Boers to utilise them as above described.

Note 7.  "Brandeywyn."  A liquor of the brandy or whisky specialty,
distilled from peaches.  It is the common tipple in use among the Dutch
colonists of the Cape, and other parts of South Africa.



CHAPTER SIX.

A RUSH OF BUFFALOES.

It had come to be late in the afternoon, with a cooler atmosphere as the
sun sank towards the horizon; but as most of the necessary jobs had been
done in the morning, there was no resumption of work.  Milking the cows,
and feeding the calves, were the only tasks that now occupied the people
of the laager, and these were entrusted to the Caffre attendants, well
up in all matters relating to cow-kine and the dairy.  Indeed, all the
different tribes of this race, whether of Kaffirland proper, or the more
northerly Zululand, look upon cattle as their chief source of wealth and
subsistence.

Some of the women had set about the evening meal; when the younger men--
nearly all sons, nephews, or other relatives of Van Dorn, Blom, and
Rynwald--bethought them of spending an hour or so in shooting at a
target, the sport of their preference, and encouraged by the elders.
For by a people, part of whose food is obtained through the chase, and
whose every-day life exposes them to its perils, being a good marksman
is naturally held in high estimation.

Getting hold of their guns, therefore, the young Boers proceeded to the
open veldt; and, after making up a match, commenced practice, the shell
of an ostrich's egg serving them for mark.  This most of them could hit
at 100 paces distance, four times out of six; and at 200 would not often
miss it.  Their long roers carried still farther, and an ordinary-sized
antelope, even at 300, would have stood but little chance with them.

And now there was keen competition between these young marksmen, with a
desire to excel, quite as much as among our crack-shots at Wimbledon.
But they had not been long thus occupied, when their ears were saluted
by a sound, admonishing them they might soon expect something to shoot
at very different from an egg-shell.  From afar, over the plain, came a
noise like the rumbling of distant thunder, growing louder as they
listened; at length to be recognised as the quick trample of buffaloes--
a herd of them "on the run."  And that they were running in the
direction of the laager could be told by the continually increasing
sound.  But soon there was no doubt of it; the animals themselves being
seen, as they came crashing through a tract of bush on the farther side
of the veldt, and bounding on over the open.  An immense herd it was,
blackening the green sward to the width of a hundred yards, and thick as
sheep in a flock.

To the amateur British Nimrod in South Africa the sight of such big
game, and in such plenty, would have imparted pleasure instead of
begetting fear.  And in the same light the young Boers would have
regarded it, but for a circumstance that presented the spectacle in an
altogether different aspect--one of danger.  Alongside the great tree,
under which their camp was placed, ran an open list leading down to the
river, and, in all probability, the buffaloes would pass that way,
making for the water.  Indeed, they were heading straight for it; though
drink might not be their object.  Their maddened bounds and loud
bellowing, as they came thundering on, seemed to betoken some other
cause of excitement than thirst.  However that might be, it soon became
evident they meant to pass under the mowana, right through the laager.
The enclosing fence of thorns would be no obstruction to them, any more
than if it were of reeds or straw; and woe to all who should chance to
be in their way!  Tornado or cyclone would not be more destructive.

By this every one in the camp, and every living creature around it, had
become aware of the threatening peril.  Men shouted, women shrieked, the
children screaming in chorus; while the horses neighed affrightedly,
dancing about in their hopples; the cattle lowed and routed; and the
dogs ran to and fro, some barking, some angrily growling.  In short, the
place lately so tranquil, most of its occupants indulging in the
_dolce-far-niente_, was suddenly transformed into what seemed a
Pandemonium.

Meanwhile, the young marksmen out in the open had not been idle.  If
taken by surprise, they felt no dismay, nor aught rendering them
powerless to act.  Instead, soon as convinced that the buffaloes were
bent for passing under the mowana, one and all made a rush towards their
horses, calling out to those in the camp to bring saddles and bridles.
They knew that the likeliest way to stem the advancing torrent was to
present front to it on horseback; and there might be time, as the
foremost of the buffaloes were still nearly a mile off.  It would be
quick work; but luckily the hoppled horses were easily and quickly
caught, and in a trice bridled and saddled.  Then, each mounting his
own--the whole party numbering nigh a dozen--they galloped out upon the
veldt to meet the advancing enemy.  Scarce another minute elapsed before
their horses' heads were within less than 300 yards from those of the
foremost buffaloes; there for an instant to be drawn up, though there
was no stoppage on the part of the bovines.  And had the young Boers
stayed silent when they halted, in all likelihood both they and their
horses would in another minute have been run over, and trampled to
death.  But they did not stay silent; instead, all together raised gun
to shoulder, and taking good aim, delivered a volley right in the faces
of the black brutes that threatened them.  There was a responsive
crashing from some of their bullets, that only struck the great
buttressed horns; but half-a-dozen of them told better, and a like
number of the buffaloes, headmost of the herd, were seen to tumble over
on the sward, dead as door-nails; the impetus of their rush shooting
them their full body's length in advance of the rest.

The reports of the roers, their blaze and smoke--sounds and sights, in
all probability, new to the wild animals--had an effect upon them
instantaneous and deterrent.  Whatever had been their worry behind,
whether pursuit by lions or otherwise, it was now less a thing of fear
than that they saw in front.  So one and all came to a stop, quickly as
they could gather up their legs.  It took time, though, the masses
behind forcing the front rank forward, beyond where it was inclined to
go.

Perhaps all might have resumed their onward career and the dreaded
catastrophe, occurred all the same, had not the young Boers taken other
precautions to prevent it.  In this they succeeded, by a continuous
shouting, yelling at the highest pitch of voice, while they hurriedly
rammed powder and ball down the barrels of their roers; and when these
were reloaded poured a second volley into the hesitating herd.  It
brought another half-dozen of the buffaloes to grass; but that was a
thing they little cared about.  Far more would they have been pleased to
see the animals turn tail, and make away from them.

And with this very sight were they gratified in an instant after.  The
first fusillade, with its fire and smoke, to say nothing of the fatal
effects, had caused fear among the wild bovines; the second brought
dismay, and, not desiring to encounter a third, the headmost of the herd
swung round, followed by the rearmost, all going off in a direction that
would carry them wide of the mowana.

"Praise be to God, our people are saved!" was the thought of the young
Boers, more than one of them giving vocal expression to it.



CHAPTER SEVEN.

A BUFFALO CHASE.

As the danger seemed averted, and there seemed no likelihood of its
recurrence, most of the young Boers drew up around the fallen buffaloes,
and dismounted to _gralloch_ and skin them.  Three, however, who had
become excited beyond restraint, kept to their saddles, and went after
the retreating herd.  This trio of implacable pursuers were Piet Van
Dorn, the eldest son of Jari; Andries Blom, a nephew of Hans; a son of
Klass Rynwald; all three nearly of an age.  But between the two first
there had long been rivalry as to which was the more accomplished
hunter, with rivalry of another sort presently to be spoken of.

Their horses being of lighter hoof than the heavy bovines, they were not
long in again coming up with the latter; each, soon as within
shot-range, singling out one, and delivering his fire.  But only two of
the buffaloes fell; the third, which was that aimed at by Van Dorn,
though hit, keeping its feet and running on.  Not with the herd,
however, for the sting of the shot seemed to drive it crazy; and,
separating from the rest, it struck to the left and went scouring off
alone.

But it was not to escape thus, at least unpursued.  Rather than it
should, Piet Van Dorn would have ridden his horse to death, and almost
to dying himself.  His hunter pride was touched, and something more.
What would Katharine Rynwald say--what think--on hearing that he had
fired and failed to bring down the thing fired at--he alone of all the
three?  And she would be sure to hear of it; ay, be told of it within
the hour.  The cynical and satisfied smile on Andries Blom's face, as he
saw the wounded buffalo bound away, seemingly but little hurt, was sure
promise that the fair Katharine would come to know all about it.  So
without waiting to say a word to the other two, Van Dorn reined round to
the left, and pressed his horse to top speed, reloading his gun as he
galloped.

Perhaps young Rynwald would have followed to lend him a helping hand,
but for Blom.  The latter did not want that buffalo killed; instead, he
hoped with all his heart that it might still escape.  And to give it a
better chance, he cried out to the brother of Katharine, who bore his
father's name--

"Klass! let us two follow the drove, and bring down another couple, so
that the camp people may have plenty of meat--dogs and all.  We mayn't
have such a chance for months."

Thus appealed to, Klass thought no more about helping Van Dorn, but
dashed on after the other, who had already started in pursuit of the
herd.  They did not again come up with it, however; but that signified
little to Andries Blom.

Meanwhile, Piet Van Dorn, who inherited all his father's hunting
instincts, with much of his prowess, was doing his best to overtake the
wounded bull.  For a bull it was, and of immense size; apparently the
patriarch of the herd it had so unaccountably forsaken.  This had caused
the young hunter some surprise; and he was also surprised, as well as
chagrined, at his first shot not having brought the bull down.  For he
had aimed at a vital part, with excellent opportunity, and could not
account for his having missed.  True, it was not altogether a miss,
though not much better, the buffalo seeming but little hurt as it
careered on over the veldt, tail high in air.  Mounted on a strong,
swift horse, however, Van Dorn at length got again within range of it;
and once more raising his roer, delivered what he believed would be its
death shot.  Only to see, with chagrin greater than ever, that though he
had made a hit, it was not a kill.  Indeed, so far from the bull being
further disabled, he but seemed to gather fresh strength, and with a
loud bellow and angry toss of the head, continued on at a heightened
speed.

But the pursuit was continued too; for with Piet Van Dorn it was now do
or die.  Not for worlds would he have allowed that buffalo to escape
him; and, once more appealing to the speed of his horse, as he rammed
another cartridge down the barrel of his gun, he followed at his
fastest.  It was a tail-on-end chase, prolonged for nearly another
league, before the pursuer thought himself near enough to send another
shot at the pursued.  He did so at length, hearing his bullet hit with a
dull thud, as it buried itself in the flesh of the great bovine.  Still
the animal fell not, neither staggered, though it made no attempt to run
on.  The third shot produced an effect in it quite different from the
two former, and, instead of further retreat, it stopped short, wheeled
round, angrily shook its horned head, tore up the turf with its hoofs,
then, with a loud bellow, charged back on its relentless pursuer.
Having perfect control of his horse, and trust in the animal's speed,
the young hunter could have easily avoided the onset by galloping wide
out of the way.  And he was in the act of doing so, had half reined
round, when he felt the horse sink beneath him, and himself going a
"cropper" over neck and head.

There was no mystery about the cause, which on the instant declared
itself by a peal of unearthly laughter ringing loud in his ears, while
at the same time he saw the creature that sent it up.  His horse had
gone knee-deep into the hole of a "laughing hyena," [Note 1] out of
which the ugly brute now bounding ran off affrightedly over the veldt,
as it went emitting its wild, weird cachinnations as the cries of a
maniac fresh escaped from some lunatic asylum.  All, too, as if in
mockery at the hunter's mishap!

The horse was in no way injured, though, perhaps, better for his rider
if he had been, for, on regaining his legs, which he instantly did, the
triple scare he had got, from the oncoming of the buffalo, his own
tumble, and the screams of the hyena, was too much for him, and he broke
off in wild stampede, leaving his master to look out for himself.

For some seconds Piet Van Dorn felt dismay, even to fearing death.  The
infuriated bull was fast nearing him, with head lowered, and horns set
to crush or impale him.  In another moment he might receive the fatal
shock to know no more.  For although he was also uninjured, and again
upon his feet, there was no hope for him to escape by flight, and his
gun was empty; nor was there aught near to afford him shield or shelter.
A look cast despairingly around revealed the veldt smooth and level for
miles in every direction.  Some bushes there were, with here and there a
straggling tree, but none seemingly of sufficient size for climbing.  At
a last glance, however, he caught sight of one branched to the ground,
and with a full, dense foliage.  It might afford at least a temporary
concealment, and without staying to think further, he made for it at
lightning speed.  Luckily it was in his line of retreat, and as no time
was lost, he got up to and behind it before the bull could overtake him.

Never was hunter more overjoyed than he, when after a quick inspection
of the tree, he saw it had two trunks, either of which would bear his
weight up to ten or twelve feet above the ground.  But there was a _per
contra_, which acted as a damper to his joy, on his perceiving that both
were beset with sharp spines.  For it was a _doorn-boom_ [Note 2] a very
"monkey puzzle," to ascend which would have deterred most _quadrumana_,
as for a time it did him.  Not long, however; it was "die dog, or eat
the hatchet," a choice between horns and thorns, and Piet Van Dorn
preferred laceration by the latter, to facing certain death by the
former.  So throwing his arm around the largest of the twin trunks he
commenced swarming up, regardless of the thorns tearing into his flesh,
even undismayed by the hissing of a _boom-slang_ [Note 3] which with
neck craned out threatened him from a branch above.  But his resolution
to climb had been too late.  Scarce were his feet well off the ground
when he experienced a shock that sent him sprawling back upon it, a
concussion of such violence as for a time to deprive him of his senses.
On recovering them he saw that he was lying some six or seven paces from
the tree, bruised and bleeding.  But where was the buffalo-bull?
Raising himself on elbow, he looked all round; but no buffalo was in
sight, nor quadruped of any kind.  His own horse, with the hyena, had
long since disappeared, and now also the horned bovine; he himself
seemingly the only living, breathing thing over all that wilderness of
veldt.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  The so-called laughing hyena (_H. Crocuta_), as the other
species, often make burrows, but sometimes appropriate those of the
ant-eater.  This species, though smaller than the striped hyena, is of a
fiercer nature and more dangerous.  So much so as to have earned for it
among the South African colonists the title of _Tiger wolf_.

Note 2.  "Doorn-boom."  Another of the thorny acacias so characteristic
of South African scenery.

Note 3.  "Boom-slang."  Literally "tree snake."  It is a large serpent,
of yellowish brown colour, which makes its home in trees.  It is not
venomous, however, though of formidable aspect.



CHAPTER EIGHT.

TRAPPED BY A TREE.

The feelings of the young Boer may be better imagined than described.
For a time mystification, then changing to weird fear, as a sense of the
supernatural stole over him.  Around the spot upon which he had been
pitched were several small ant-hills; so, scrambling to the top of the
nearest, and then standing erect, he had the veldt under his view for
miles on every side.  He could see no bush, nor other cover that would
have concealed an animal so large as was the buffalo.  Yet buffalo there
was none on it.

It now recurred to him that his unconsciousness might have been of
longer duration than he had supposed it; giving the buffalo time to
scamper off out of sight.  But this hypothesis was also untenable for
more reasons than one.  For an animal of such bulk to have got beyond
his view on that smooth, level plain was of itself highly improbable.
Besides, why should the buffalo have run away from him?  The last
glimpse he had of it was while in mad, determined rush towards himself,
and he knew it was the shock of its horns against the doorn-boom that
had shot him off the tree as from a catapult.  What reason would it have
for retreating then, wounded as it was, and feeling itself, too, master
of the situation, as it must have felt on becoming the aggressor?  Of
all this the young hunter was conscious, and not on that account the
more mystified.  For he had also bethought him of his three bullets sent
into the buffalo's body, recalling how carefully he had taken aim, and
how their failing to bring the animal down, had surprised and puzzled
him.  It was then the weird fear came over him in full, almost a horror,
as the mystery remained unsolved.  He rubbed his eyes, and once more
took a survey of the veldt; scanning it minutely all over, as he
mechanically interrogated, "Am I in my senses? or has it been a dream?"

At this crisis his ears were saluted by a sound, seemingly in response
to his questioning, and promising to end his perplexity.  It was a loud
snort, which he knew could only proceed from the throat of a
buffalo-bull, and the same whose sudden disappearance had been puzzling
him.  Just then reverberating all over the veldt in a long, continued
roar, it seemed to rise out of the earth.

But another noise in accompaniment was less misleading as to direction.
This was the swish of leaves, with a snapping of twigs, as a tree tossed
about by the wind.  Turning his eyes upon that he had late essayed to
climb, he saw it was in violent agitation; oscillating to and fro, as if
under the impulse of a tornado.  But the bellowing which he now knew to
come from among its branches told a different tale, proclaiming the
buffalo still there.

Though thus relieved from all awe of the unearthly, Piet Van Dorn was
almost as much mystified as ever.  What could the animal be doing by the
doorn-boom, and why had it stayed there?  As yet he saw it not, the
thick foliage intervening, but its repeated routs, with the shakings of
the tree, left no doubt about its presence.  The thought flashed upon
him that the bull supposed he had succeeded in ascending the tree, and
was still up in it; so in blind fury had remained there, at intervals
butting the trunk and bellowing.

Under this belief, both natural and probable, the first impulse of the
young hunter was to take to his heels, and put space between himself and
the dangerous brute, as much as the time would permit.  For at any
moment the bull might part from the tree, or come round it, and again
catching sight of him renew the attack.  So dropping down from the
ant-hill, he was about to make off, when he bethought of his gun, twice
shaken out of his grasp, and lying on the ground near by.  But it was
also dangerously near the doorn-boom, and to get hold of it would be a
ticklish affair.  Still, to return to the camp without his gun--bad
enough having to go without his horse--would be fearfully humiliating.
How delighted Andries Blom would be, and how he would crow over it!

"No!  I won't go back without the gun, at all events," soliloquised Piet
Van Dorn, with returning courage, more confidently adding, "Nor leave I
this spot, till I can take with me a better account of what's happened
than I can now."

Thus resolving, he stepped softly towards the roer, with his eye upon
the shaking tree; and soon had the gun in hand again.  Of course, it was
empty; as while retreating before the buffalo, he had not found an
opportunity to reload.  Luckily, his quilted cartridge-belt was still
fast buckled around his body, and a supply of percussion caps lay
convenient in the pocket of his civet-skin waistcoat.  Down went the
cartridge and rammed home, almost as quick as a partridge-shooter could
have charged his patent "central fire."  And now ready, the young jager
set face for the doorn-boom, determined to try final conclusions with
the brute that had parted him from his horse, besides giving him a
scare, such as he had never before experienced.

Notwithstanding his restored courage, he was far from feeling reckless,
and made approach with all due caution.  For as yet, much of the mystery
remained unsolved, and the behaviour of the buffalo as great an enigma
as ever.  The animal still continued its terrific routing, while the
tree zig-zagged to and fro, both trunks, as though threatening to break
down with a double crash.  But for the thick foliage around the base,
the young hunter would long before have had explanation of a thing so
incomprehensible.  It came at last, however, as he drew close in to the
tree, and saw the buffalo with neck caught between the twin trunk, fixed
and fast as if in a vice.  In its furious rush it had forced its head
through; the young flexible stems parting to let it pass, then
reclosing; the neck was held as in a yoke, and the huge buttressed horns
could not be drawn back again.  So the bull had trapped himself in a
tree!

Seeing how things stood, Piet Van Dorn could not restrain himself from
giving way to loud laughter.  He did smile, a vengeful smile, as he
thought of the trouble the black brute had put him to, with the chagrin
it had caused him.  But the better feeling of humanity soon triumphed
over that of anger and revenge.  He saw that the buffalo had received
its death wound, from the shots he had fired at it, and its struggles in
the clasp of the doorn-boom were but its last throes of life.  Mercy
appealed to him to put an end to them; which he did by stepping close up
to the animal, and sending a fourth bullet into its body; this was so
aimed as to deprive it of life, with scarce a kick given after.



CHAPTER NINE.

BELATED ON THE VELDT.

For that day Piet Van Dorn's hunting was at at an end, but with a finale
far from satisfactory to him.  True, he had succeeded in killing the
buffalo, and would not have to return to camp trophyless.  But how about
his horse?  The latter might be there before him--in all likelihood was
there already--if not lost on the veldt.  If lost, it would be no slight
misfortune; his mount being of the best ever ridden by a Vee-Boer, and
one that could not well be replaced.  Still he had not yet come to
contemplating the matter in so serious a light; trusting to the animal's
instinct to guide it back to its companions.  But even this would have
sinister consequences.  That anything could have parted him and his pet
steed, above all a tumble, and its becoming known to the fair
_fraulein_, his ladye love, was aught but pleasant to contemplate.  And
the horse returning riderless would naturally create alarm in the camp,
where, besides a sweetheart, he had an affectionate mother and sisters
who would be in an agony of apprehension about him, he knew.

Furthermore, the thought of having to trudge it back afoot, wounded as
he was--in fact a good deal disabled--was of itself sufficiently
disagreeable.  But just on this account was it necessary for him to
start off at once.

The sun was now little more than the breadth of its own disc above the
horizon; and, if night caught him upon the veldt, he might have to stay
in it till morning, almost certainly would.

Thus reflecting, he made no longer delay than the occasion called for.
Bleeding wounds were to be bound up; ugly scratches got in the attempt
at climbing the doorn-boom, and a thorn or two that still stuck in his
flesh had to be extracted.  Then there was the reloading of his gun,
which it was not prudent to have empty in such a place.  Finally he cut
off the buffalo's tail, to be taken along, less by way of trophy, than
as evidence that, despite so many other mischances, he had not failed as
a hunter.  He would have preferred taking the horns, as he had never
before seen so grand a pair; besides, it was to them he owed the life
left him.  But for their getting entangled in the tree, instead of his
now, in cold blood, cutting off the buffalo's tail, the brute might have
been standing over his lifeless body, trampling it into a mash.  But,
notwithstanding the service the horns had done him, and tempting as a
trophy, it would take some time to detach them from the head, more than
he had to spare, and in his disabled state they would be too much of a
burden.  So, shouldering his gun, with the bull's tail tied to its
muzzle, he strode away from a spot so replete with incident, and what,
but a short while before, seemed mystery incomprehensible.

Though comprehending it now, his perplexities were not over nor his
troubles at an end.  Scarce had he commenced moving off when the
hitherto unthought of question occurred to him--

"What direction am I to take?"

It may seem strange his not thinking of this before; but men in his
situation rarely do.  The traveller on African plain or American prairie
only becomes conscious of being lost when he _is_ lost.  Just such tardy
consciousness now came to Piet Van Dorn, but with so keen a sense of it
as to bring him to an abrupt stop before he had made half-a-dozen steps.

For a time he stood scanning the horizon around, but saw nothing there
to give him guidance.  He had hoped to descry a dark line along it; the
timber skirting the stream by which they had encamped; but nothing of
this was in sight.  Even the great mowana, with several others of its
kind he knew to be near it, were below the level of the plain.  [Note
1].  This added to his uneasiness, telling of the long distance he would
have to tramp it, even with direction known.  But the last was his
present trouble, and he bent himself, with all the energies of his mind,
to determine it.  What assistance could he get from the sun?  Nothing
else seemed to promise any, so he turned his gaze upon that.  He
remembered its having been before his face while he was pursuing the
buffalo; well remembered this, as it had been in his eyes, and so
dazzled them as to interfere with his aim.  Indeed, he blamed it, more
than aught else, for his having failed to bring the animal down.  But
the sun had since changed place in the sky; true, not much, still enough
to make it a blind guide, notwithstanding its brightness.

It would help him in a way, however; and turning his back upon it, he
was about to start off eastward, when lo! tracks on the ground before
him!  Two sorts of hoof-marks there were; one cloven, the other whole
and shod.  The presence of neither surprised him, knowing, as he did,
what animals had made them--of course the buffalo and his own horse.  It
was where he had fired his third shot, and the chase had come to an end
by the bull rounding upon him.  But beyond he could see the same tracks
in a long line over the veldt, indicating the direction in which he had
approached the place.  There was no need for longer doubt or hesitation,
he could not do better than take the trail of the chase backward; and
back on it he went.

Not far, however, before again getting interrupted.  Out of some low
scrub, through which it led, came a peal of wild hysterical laughter,
that, to ears unacquainted with it, and in such a solitary place, would
have been appalling.  But Piet Van Dorn knew the sort of creature that
laughed; was sure of its being the same which had lately saluted him in
a similar manner, as if mockingly.  Remembering this, recalling also,
that to it he was indebted for the loss of his horse, with other
resultant troubles, quick as lightning, he jerked his gun from his
shoulder, and lowered it to the level.  Almost at the same instant he
perceived the hyena making off through the bushes, as it sent back
another of its unearthly cachinnations--the last it ever uttered.  It
did not even succeed in finishing that, being abruptly silenced by a
bullet that dropped it dead in its tracks; the loud report of the roer
replacing the animal's voice in prolonged reverberation over the plain.

With something like a feeling of satisfied vengeance, the young hunter
saw the hyena roll over dead.  But for it he might still have been
astride his noble steed--almost surely would--with the buffalo's grand
horns carried on the croup behind him.  And how different his
situation--how aggravating!  But there was no time to dwell on it,
however; so, hastily ramming down another cartridge, and without even
deigning to look at the worthless quarry killed, he continued on.

So long as daylight lasted, there would be no difficulty about his
taking up the trail; he could sight it going at a run.  And run he did,
now and then, despite his crippled condition, so anxious was he to get
back to camp, though less on his own account than that of the anxious
ones there.  Besides, to be out all night on the veldt alone and
weakened as he was, were of itself a thing of danger.  Not only cowardly
hyenas, but courageous leopards, even lions, might be prowling about and
make prey of him.

With such incentives to haste, he made it--all that was in his power.
But despite all, he saw the sun sink down below the horizon without
getting sight of the belt of timber he was looking for.  Nor came it in
view during the short interval of twilight that succeeded, and through
which he had hastened on without halt or pause, till night's darkness
was almost down.  Then he made stop, and ascended an ant-hill, with a
half-despairing hope that from its summit he might descry the wished-for
beacon--perhaps see the lights of the laager fires.

He saw them not, neither blaze nor spark; and, as night had now drawn
its sable mantle around him, he had but the two alternatives--stay where
he was, or go blindly groping onward.  Making choice of the former, he
stayed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  As stated in a former note, the "mowana" in girth and spread of
branches is perhaps the largest of all known trees, but far from being
the tallest, in height rarely exceeding a hundred feet.



CHAPTER TEN.

A HORSE CHASED BY WILD HOUNDS.

That night there were sore hearts in the camp under the mowana, and eyes
that closed not in sleep.  A mother lay awake, thinking apprehensively
about her son; sisters in like manner were in fear for the fate of a
brother; while a young girl, not sister, but sweetheart, was no less
uneasy about the absence of a lover.

Perhaps had Piet Van Dorn, the object of this concentrated solicitude,
been only sure of its being shared by Katharina Rynwald--for she was the
waking sweetheart--the long, unhappy hours he was constrained to pass
upon the veldt would have seemed shorter, and been less irksome.  As it
was, he too slept little, in part kept awake by the pain of his wounds,
and partly by torturing thoughts.  Withal, he took steps for passing the
night, in the best and safest way possible under the circumstances.
Anticipating a heavy dew,--which indeed, had already begun to fall--with
that raw chilliness, as much the accompaniment of a tropical night as of
one in northern climes, he had need to take precautions against it.
Thinly and lightly clad, just as when interrupted at target-practice,
ever since hotly engaged, and all over perspiration, experience told him
there was danger from this alone.  So, warned by it, soon as he had made
up his mind to remain there he dropped down from the ant-hill, and
bethought himself of kindling a fire.  But for this the luck was against
him.  There was no wood near, nor anywhere within sight; not a stick.
All around the veldt was treeless, and alike bare of bushes; the only
relief to its monotonous nakedness being some score or two ant-hills,
like hayricks scattered over it.

Yes, there was something more, which after a time came under his eyes;
some tall bunch grass growing at no great distance off, or rather had
grown, for it was now withered and dead.  True, it would not make a fire
that could be kept up; but the young hunter saw it might be utilised in
a way almost as good, by making a warm bed of it.  Soon as thought of,
he unsheathed his hunting-knife, and set to cutting the grass, as reaper
with "hook and crook."  Nor stayed he his hand, till several large
armfuls lay along the earth.  These, one after another, he carried up to
the ant-hill he had first stopped at, and which, as already ascertained
by him, had been abandoned by its insect builders.

It was but the task of a few seconds to form the dry grass into a rough,
but fairly comfortable couch; upon which he lay down, drawing the
straggled selvedge over him, by way of blanket and coverlet.  Thus
snugly ensconced, he took out his pipe, with flint, steel, and tinder,
struck a light, and commenced smoking.

One passing near, and seeing a red coal glowing in that heap of haylike
grass, with smoke rising in curls over it, might have wondered at the
grass not catching fire, and blazing up.  But there was no one passing
near, or likely to pass; and Piet Van Dorn continued puffing away in
solitary silence.

After a time the tobacco in his pipe was burnt to the bottom; but
finding it had given him some relief from the stinging of his sores, he
refilled the pipe bowl, and went on smoking.

At length the narcotic property of the weed produced a soporific effect;
Morpheus demanded his toll; and the wearied hunter, despite pain of
wounds, and mental anxiety, sank into sleep, meerschaum in mouth.
Luckily, he lay on his back, and the pipe from habit was held tight
between his teeth, till the ashes in it became cold.  Had it been
otherwise, he might have soon and suddenly waked up, to find himself as
a rat in the heart of a burning hayrick.

As it chanced, he slumbered long, though how long he could not tell.
Dreamt also; in his dream, fancying himself still charged upon by the
buffalo and that he heard its heavy tread on the firm turf as it came
thundering towards him!  But was it fancy?  Was the thing all a dream?
Questions he put to himself, when at length awakened by the visionary
scene, he lay listening.  No, not all.  The trampling sound was real and
recognisable; not as made by a buffalo, but the hoof strokes of a
galloping horse!  Had there been any doubt about this, what instantly
succeeded would have solved it--a neigh ringing clear and shrill on the
calm night air.

Quick as a Jack-in-the-box, Piet Van Dorn was upon his feet; and with
like alertness leaped up to the top of the ant-hill.  The moon had
meanwhile risen, and her light flooded the veldt all over, making
objects distinguishable on it at far distance, almost as by day.  But it
did not need looking far for him to see the horse, nor an instant of
time in recognising the animal as his own.  Not much longer, either, was
he in learning why it galloped and screamed--for it was more scream than
neigh that had waked up the echoes of the night: still waking them, in
quick successive bursts, as the horse rushed affrightedly to and fro.
No wonder at his fright with such a following; full a hundred other
animals flecked and spotted, as seen under the clear moonlight: to all
appearance a pack of hounds in pursuit of him!  And hounds were they,
but such as never came out of kennel; far fiercer than these, for they
were the _wilde-honden_ [Note 1] of South Africa.  They were scattered
over the veldt, in squads here and there, with the horse careering from
point to point between them; and go in what direction he would, it was
to get headed off by one group or another.

At a glance the young hunter took in the situation, and trembled for his
steed.  The poor animal was black with sweat, and evidently far
exhausted.  No doubt it had been running thus pursued for hours, and at
any moment now might be pulled down, and torn to pieces.  How was such a
fate to be averted?  How could the horse be saved.

The first impulse of its master, so interrogating himself, was to catch
hold of his gun, and rush out to the rescue.  The gun he caught hold of;
but then came the thought, that instead of saving the horse, he would be
himself sacrificed.  Well knew he the habits of the wilde-honden with
their fierce, savage nature, and that, in their then excited state, man
would be no more feared by them than horse, or any other animal.  It
would be like bearding a pack of hungry wolves; in fact, flinging away
his life.  But what ought he to do?  What could he?  Nothing.

"Ah! yes; something!" he exclaimed, hope returning with a thought that
had flashed across his brain.  "There may still be a chance, if I can
make him hear me."

Saying which, he thrust the tips of three fingers between his lips, and
blew a whistle that went screeching across the veldt, repeating it
several times.  But much repetition was not necessary.

At the first note of it reaching his ears, the horse was seen to give a
start of recognition; then, as the second was sent after, the sagacious
animal, trained to the signal, answered it with a joyous neigh, and came
galloping up to the ant-hills.  In half a minute more he was among them;
and now guided by a well-known voice, soon stood by his master's side,
panting, quivering in every fibre of his frame, but confidently
whimpering, as if at length assured of safety.

But he was not safe yet; neither he, nor his master, as the latter well
knew.  If he did not, it was instantly made known to him, as he saw the
wilde-honden gather in from all sides trooping after.  In a trice they
too had entered among the ant-hills, and were still coming on for that
beside which he and the horse stood.  To the young hunter it was a
crisis, dangerous as when being charged by the buffalo, and equally
slight seemed his chance of escape.  He had dropped back to the ground--
knowing he would be no safer on the ant-heap, which the clawed creatures
could easily scale--and stood holding his horse in hand.  The animal was
still under saddle and bridle, as when it ran away from him.  Should he
spring upon its back, and attempt to escape by flight?  Impossible.  The
horse was already tottering on his legs; another mile, perhaps half that
with a rider on his back, and he would surely go to grass.

Piet Van Dorn was left no time for deliberation.  What he did after was
done in hottest haste, unreflectingly, almost despairingly.  Yet were
its results of the best; could not have been better, if planned
deliberately and in coolest blood.  He first discharged his roer at the
nearest and foremost of the honden, which went rolling over with a howl.
The report of the gun--noise so unexpected--caused the rest to falter
and hang back; then, before they had recovered confidence, they were
saluted by a second clap of that thunder, so new to them, with its blaze
of lightning, which still further cowed them.  For all, they did not yet
seem inclined to retreat; and Piet Van Dorn, fancying the flash more
frightened them than the crack, suddenly bethought him of a way to make
it more effective.  Quickly striking a light, he set fire to the
withered grass, on which he had lately been lying.  It caught at once,
flaring up with a flame that mocked the moon.  And to keep it ablaze he
employed the long barrel of his now empty gun, fork fashion, tossing the
tufts of burning grass high in the air, all the while shouting at the
loudest pitch of his voice.  Continuing to shout so, he would soon have
been hoarse.  Fortunately he was spared this infliction; for the
wilde-honden, at first sight of the conflagration, which they doubtless
believed to be the veldt on fire, took to their heels, and scampered off
in every direction; leaving the young hunter, and his newly-recovered
horse, masters and sole possessors of the field.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  "Wilde-honden" (_Canis picta_).  These wild dogs of South
Africa have some affinities with hyenas.  They are sometimes called the
hunting hyena (_Hyena venatica_).  They are as large as stag-hounds, and
flecked and spotted in a similar manner, black and white blotches on a
ground colour of reddish brown.  But for their erect ears, which are
large and black, they would bear a still greater resemblance to hounds.
There is this also in their habit of pursuing their prey in packs, which
renders them much more formidable than the hyena.  They have little fear
of man, and men have been often killed by them.



CHAPTER ELEVEN.

TRACKING BACK TO CAMP.

His lost steed, thus strangely, as it were miraculously, restored to
him, gave Piet Van Dorn gratification in more ways than one.  The
thought of his horse reaching the camp before himself, and so causing
keenest alarm, had been his major trouble.  But there was a minor one,
far from insignificant, affecting his skill as an equestrian.  Of his
hunter-prowess he had the proof; but who would know how the horse had
got away from him, save those who might put faith in his own account of
it?  That there would be some to discredit him, he knew; Andries Blom
would take care of that.  But now he would ride back to camp with the
buffalo's tail flouted triumphantly at the muzzle of his gun, as flag
captured from an enemy; instead of sneers, or sympathy, to receive
congratulations.

Under the excitement of this pleasant anticipation, that night he could
sleep no more, nor did he try.  And there was enough to keep him awake,
in caring for his horse, the poor animal needing all the attention he
could give it.  Having cut some wisps of the withered grass, he rubbed
its coat dry, which greatly refreshed it; while the grass itself proved
a fodder not unpalatable.  But the horse suffered more from want of
water than food, as he could see; and there was no water near, an added
reason for making quick departure from the place.  He would have started
away from it at once, but the sky had become suddenly overcast, the moon
obscured by thick cumulous clouds, and the night darker than ever.  He
could barely see the white ant-hills close around him, and of course the
trail he had needs still follow would be undistinguishable.  So he must
wait for the morning's light.

But light came sooner, and from a different source--out of the clouds
themselves.  They were rent by forks of lightning, and illumined by its
flashes, with an accompaniment of thunder.  Rain followed, descending in
sheets, as if emptied out of dishes--true storm of the tropics.

There was water now for a hundred thousand horses, yet how was he to
catch enough for one?  He had no vessel, or aught else, to collect as
much as a mouthful, though his animal was in a very agony of thirst,
himself the same.  He looked around in hopes of seeing a puddle, but
there was none.  Soon as it fell the water filtered into the loose sandy
soil, as if poured into rat-holes.  What was to be done?

"Ha!  A happy idea; the very thing itself!"  So soliloquised he at sight
of the rain running down the sloped sides of the ant-hills in rivulets.
Drawing knife again, he commenced delving into the firm tough compost,
and kept at it till he had hollowed out a trough capable of containing a
gallon.  Then making some diagonal scratches to guide the water into it,
he had the satisfaction of seeing it soon fill, while he and his horse
drank their fill also.

The downpour was not of long continuance, though long enough to leave
him without a dry rag on his body.  Little recked he of that now, being
far more solicitous about another effect it might have produced, and
which he feared it had.  Nor was his fear groundless; for when day at
length dawned, and he rode out to get back upon the trace hitherto
guiding him, not a sign of it was to be seen, neither track of horse nor
buffalo.  They had been all filled up by the rain wash--completely
obliterated--and once more he was a lost man!

This time, however, he was less dismayed, from having his horse under
him.  The sun had not yet risen, but the aurora, its precursor, told him
which point was east; and, believing this to be the right direction, he
took it.  But long after the sun was up, he found himself wandering on
the veldt, as much puzzled about his course as ever.  The points of the
compass he knew well enough, but the belt of timber was still invisible,
and he may have gone too far eastward.

He was about reining round to try another slant, when again tracks came
under his eye--hundreds of them.  All buffalo tracks these were, the
hoof-prints well defined and easily recognisable.  For the ground was
different from that by the ant-hills, a firm, stiff clay, which had
resisted the beating down of the rain.  He had little doubt of their
being made by the drove of yesterday's chase, and less after riding in
among them, and making note of their number; the buffaloes had been
close to the camp-ground, and it only needed proceeding along their
trail to reach it.

Once more was Piet Van Dorn full of confidence.  But only for a very few
seconds, when uncertainty again took possession of him.  In what
direction had the buffaloes been going when they passed that point?
Towards the camp, or from it, after being met and turned by the
marksmen?  He was unable to answer this question, and its answer was of
absolute necessity ere he could proceed a step farther.  Without it he
knew not which was his way, and would be as likely to take the wrong as
the right one.  It might be of serious consequence if he went wrong--
indeed fatal--so what he should do next needed deliberation.

What he did do was, first to make more careful examination of the
hoof-marks, hoping from them to draw deductions that would serve him.
Not as to time; in that respect there could not be any great difference
between the tracks going toward the camp and those from it.  Even if
there had, the rain would have rendered it imperceptible.  But there
might be a difference in the stride: animals pursued would make longer
bounds than if running at will.

His new inspection, however proved of no avail; nor could it, as he now
bethought himself, recalling the fact that the buffaloes were in full
run when first seen, and likely long before.

He was about raising his eyes despairingly, when something on the ground
caught his glance, and kept it rivetted.  It was only a little pool of
water--rain that had fallen still lying--but water dyed red, and with
blood, beyond a doubt!  Of this he was confident; and equally sure it
was blood from one of the buffaloes that had been wounded when the
volleys were fired into the drove.

Hitherto he had been rather inclined to go as they had gone, still
thinking his proper course lay eastward.  Now he knew better; and
without further delay, wheeled his horse round, and struck along the
trail backward.

Thenceforth it was all plain sailing, the track easily distinguishable,
in places as if a steam-plough had passed along turning up the soil.  He
could have gone at a gallop, and would but for sparing his horse, which
still showed signs of suffering from the terrible strain late put upon
it.  Withal, he made fair way, and in another hour came upon familiar
ground, where the buffalo-bull he had himself pursued separated from the
herd.  Without seeing its tracks, or those of his horse, he could not
have mistaken the place.  There lay the carcases of two other buffaloes,
the pair killed by Rynwald and Blom.  They were little more than
skeletons now; for as he rode up to them nigh a score of jackals went
scampering off, while twice that number of vultures rose sluggishly into
the air.

At this point, for the first time since leaving it, Piet Van Dorn caught
sight of the timbered belt, to comprehend why he had not sooner sighted
it.  The reason was, the river, with some miles breadth of the adjacent
terrain, being below the general level of the plain.  He saw the mowana,
too, under which was the laager, perceiving that he was even yet leagues
from it.  But distance no more troubled him; his thoughts, as his
glances, being now given to two horsemen who were coming in quick gallop
towards him.  On their drawing nearer he recognised one of them as
Hendrik Rynwald; the other not Andries Blom, but his own brother.

They had come in quest of him, sent by anxious friends, themselves as
anxious as any.  Rejoiced were they at the encounter, and not less he,
though his joy in part proceeded from another and different cause.
Never listened he to sweeter words than those blurted out by Hendrik
Rynwald, a generous, guileless youth, who said, grasping his hand--

"I'm so glad, Piet, to see you safe!  And won't Sis Kattie, too!  I
don't believe she slept a wink, all of last night."



CHAPTER TWELVE.

A FORMIDABLE OBSTRUCTION.

Explanations having been hastily exchanged, the trio of young Boers
turned face toward the camp.  Burning to make known the joyful news,
Rynwald and Piet's brother would have gone back at a gallop, and so Piet
himself.  But there was something to delay them: this the horse late
chased by wilde-honden.  The rain, at first refreshing the animal, had
afterwards produced an opposite effect, and the result of the sudden
change from heat to chill was a founder, the creature being now barely
able to keep on its legs.  As it could not carry him further without
cruelty, its merciful master, dismounting, led it along.

This entailed slow progress, and thinking of those in the camp, with
anxieties to be relieved, young Rynwald proposed galloping on ahead.  To
this neither of the others objected, and he was about spurring away from
them, when there arose another obstruction, of a still more formidable
kind.  An animal it was, seen standing right on the track he would have
to take--one that could not be passed with impunity.  Many animals were
there, for it was where several other buffaloes had been shot down,
whose carcases, now mangled, were surrounded by jackals, hyaenas, and
vultures.  But it was not any of these that stood in Hendrik Rynwald's
way, in an attitude of angry menace.  Instead, the king and master of
them all--a lion; one of the largest and fiercest-looking any of the
young hunters had ever seen, much less encountered.  The tawny brute
appeared as though he had but late arrived on the ground, coming in at
the end of the feast to find only bare bones; and, being hungry, the
disappointment had roused his rage to the highest pitch of fury.  Having
caught sight of the oncoming horsemen, he evidently intended venting his
spleen, as well as appeasing his hunger, on one or other of them.  He
stood crouched and roaring, with mane erect and tail oscillating to and
fro; both the attitude and action well-known to lion-hunters as
indicative of greatest danger.

The two bestriding fresh horses need not have much feared the
black-maned brute, and for that matter could have avoided an encounter
with it by riding wide away and around.  For to a man well mounted the
lion is only dangerous in thicket, or jungle, hindering free action to
the horse.  But circumstanced as they were, the young Boers saw that
only two of their horses had a fair chance of escaping thus, and perhaps
but two of themselves.  The third must surely come to grief in any
attempt at shunning the lion, and to face it boldly could not well have
worse result; so facing it was instantly determined on.  Indeed, the
resolve could not have been delayed; as at this place the veldt was
overgrown with tall grass, and they were close to the danger before
sighting it--so close, that in a dozen of his cat-like leaps the lion
might at any moment launch himself in their midst.

Less from any hope of his now staggering steed helping him to escape,
than the impulse of instinct--or rather habit--Piet Van Dorn sprang back
into the saddle; and the three, drawing their horses' heads together,
remained at halt with their eyes fixed on the leeuw.  The brute was
within range of their roers, and the question was whether all three
should fire together, or in succession.

Not much time was allowed them for determination, in fact, not any.
Scarce had they their guns in readiness when, with a roar loud as last
night's thunder, the lion came vaulting towards them.

The three pulled trigger almost simultaneously; two of them, Hendrik
Rynwald and the younger Van Dorn, to miss, their frightened horses as
they danced about spoiling their aim.  Different was it with that ridden
by Piet, whose forlorn condition was, possibly, as unexpectedly the
saving of his own and master's life.  Too far gone even for affright, he
stood stock still; nor budged an inch, till the roer, with muzzle
projected beyond his ears, belched forth flame and smoke; a bullet at
the same time, which striking the leeuw fair on the frontlet, went
crashing through its skull.  As a result the creature, so dreaded,
tumbled instantly over like a shot rabbit, and lay in the long grass
equally harmless.

With all South Africans, be they natives, colonists, Vee-Boers, or
other, the killing of a lion is an event to be chronicled, and he who
kills one is deemed to have performed a feat worthy of great praise; of
course all the greater when one of such size as that which had fallen to
Piet Van Dorn's bullet.  Its skin would be a spoil indeed, and he
determined taking it with him.  There was no longer such need for haste
on his part, as Hendrik Rynwald could now carry out his original
intention of preceding to camp--which he did.

Dismounting again, the brothers set about stripping the leeuw of its
pelt; an operation which cost them but a few minutes' time, both being
used to such work.  Then with the skin thrown over the saddle, they
continued on toward the timber, Piet leading his horse as before.

In another half-hour, or so, they were near enough the camp-ground to
make out the figures of the men and animals that occupied it; to see
something, moreover, which filled them with surprise, even amazement.
There was commotion in the laager and around it, people rushing
excitedly hither and thither; horses and oxen being caught up and led
hurriedly from point to point.  Borne on the still air also they could
hear voices, shouts, uttered in alarm as the tone testified.

In wonder at what it all meant, the brothers pushed faster forward.
Piet, no longer so tender with his halting steed, forced the animal into
a trot, himself running alongside.  And when within nearer view their
wonder was no less, instead greater, and now with fear added.  For they
saw the waggons drawn out upon the open veldt, with the oxen in long
line attached to the trek-touws, while the horses were all under saddle
and bridled.  Clearly the camp was being broken up, and about to be
abandoned.  But for what reason?  Had the Matabele turned hostile, and
was a party of them threatening attack?  But no, it could not be that.
If attacked, the laager would be the best place for resistance; far
safer than with the waggons _on trek_.  What then could be causing a
movement so unexpected--so inexplicable?  The two youths were in a very
maze of mystification.  But not much longer were they left in it.  When
within half a mile of the camp, a horseman came riding in all haste
towards them--Hendrik Rynwald.

"What is it?" hailed they, soon as he was within hearing.

To receive for answer, "The _tsetse_!  The _tsetse_!"



CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

ATTACKED BY "TSETSE."

In all likelihood few of my readers need telling what is the tsetse, Dr
Livingstone and other travellers having given full account of this
scourge of Southern Africa.

An insect, little bigger than the common fly of England, but whose sting
is deadly as the bite of rattle-snake or cobra-di-capello; fortunately
not to man himself, but to man's best friends in the animal world--dogs,
horses, cattle, and sheep [Note 1].  So when Andries Rynwald called out
the name of the venomous creature, Piet Van Dorn and his brother had
instant and clear comprehension why the camp was being so abruptly
abandoned.  The tsetse had made its appearance there; in flight lay the
sole chance of saving the stock, and even this might be too late.

Only within the hour had the danger been discovered, by the presence of
the insect becoming known.  On the days before, and up till nigh noon of
this one, nothing had been seen of it after most careful search.  As a
customary precaution they had looked for it all around the mowana.  Had
it been observed, no camp would have been established there, much less a
laager; not even the shortest halt made.  But confident of the place
being uninfested, the wearied travellers had joyfully out-spanned with
the intention of taking a long spell of rest.  Then, the alarm caused by
the buffaloes over, they had breathed freely again, and were enjoying
themselves more than ever; for that danger, so far from resulting in
damage, had proved a profit to them.  The daily provisioning of such a
large party called for a goodly quantity of meat, more than was always
obtainable by the chase.  On the Karoo, just crossed, wild animals were
so scarce and shy, that with all the skill of their hunters the larder
had run low.  And no longer having their sheep to depend upon, the
buffaloes coming that way, with so many killed, had been a bit of rare
good luck, seeming almost providential.

Nor did they fail to make the best of it; these animals having been
skinned and butchered; the choicest of their beef cut into thin strips,
and hung over riems stretched between the trees for conversion into
_bultong_ [Note 2].  There they were still hanging, like strings of
sausages; the red meat fast becoming a mahogany colour as the hot sun
shone down upon it, and drew out its juices.

The _naacht-maal_ of the evening before had been a rich repast.  The
ant-hill kitchen-range, again called into requisition, had sent up its
appetising odour, with buffalo steaks frizzling in the pans, and
tongues, the tit-bits, simmering in the pots.  The same for the
_morgen-maal_ of this the next day, which, withal, had been far from
cheerful.  Quite the reverse to the relatives of Piet Van Dorn, as to
most of the camp people, the missing youth being a general favourite.
Anxiety on his account, keen throughout all the night and morning hours,
had reached its keenest when Andries Rynwald was seen coming back at a
gallop, and alone.  He seemed the bearer of bad tidings, while in
reality those he brought were of the best, relieving every one on the
instant of his arrival.  Indeed, before it, as from afar off he had
shouted, to ears acutely listening, "Piet's safe!" soon to follow the
joy-giving announcement with account of why the brothers lagged behind.

Again was there gladness in the camp, greater than ever, as it always is
when the lost are found.  But, alas! it was not of long continuance.
Scarce had the returned searcher dropped down from his saddle, when
those who gathered clusteringly about him and his horse became conscious
of a sound, which caused one and all to start and cry out.  It was but
as the buzz of a blue-bottle, but with sharper intonation and
intermittent.  In short, they knew it to be the "tzip" of the tsetse; at
the same instant catching sight of the insect itself, its brown colour,
with yellow-banded abdomen, rendering it easily recognisable.  With its
long wings in whirring play, it was flitting about over the horse's
body, as if in search of a spot to settle on.

Eager hands were stretched forth to seize hold of, or crush it.  They
supposed it to have come along with the horse, and so the only one of
its kind there.  But their efforts were idle; with the sun high and hot,
the tsetse becomes exceedingly active, and as difficult to be caught as
a _bombylins_ or dragon-fly.  Darting from point to point, it eluded all
their attempts; in fine, retreating from its persecutors with a bizz
that seemed to say, "Catch me if you can."

It flew off towards some of the trek oxen that chanced to be near, and
several of the men followed in hopes of being able to kill it there.
But their surprise was light compared with their alarm, when, on getting
up to the oxen, they saw not one tsetse but a score of them; ay, there
might be hundreds or thousands for aught they could tell.  The pestilent
insects were flitting about everywhere, and it was evident not only the
trek oxen, but the milk cows and horses were being assailed by them.
The dogs, too, as could be told by their rushing around and biting their
own bodies; some closing their jaws with a snap, like the shutting of a
snuff-box lid, in their efforts to seize the creatures that were
torturing them.

It was now that the camp rang with that cry which had caused
consternation in many another, and broken many another up.

"Tsetse--tsetse!" called out half a score voices in chorus.  "Gott en
himmel!  They're swarming all around!"

Then followed a scene of wildest excitement; that rushing to and fro
observed by Piet Van Dorn and his brother as they came within sight, and
heard the racket of shouts which had so mystified them.

They understood it all now, before Rynwald came up to them; who, after
some hurried words of explanation little needed, reined his horse round,
and the three rode together to the camp.

On arrival there, Piet Van Dorn was embraced by loving, affectionate
arms, and had kisses showered on his cheeks.  Even a sly one got he from
his sweetheart, in a shadowed spot under the trees.  But not much was
made of the spoils he had brought back.  Just then the Vee-Boers had
other fish to fry--a great danger to get rid of--which he, as all the
rest, was called upon to combat.

Quickly dismounting, he lent a hand of help in the lading of the
waggons, which soon after-packed in a hurried, higgledy-piggledy
fashion--were ready for the route.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  "The tsetse" (_Glossinia morsitans_).  Although the sting of
this insect is fatal to the domesticated quadrupeds above named, the
mule and ass are not injured by it.  Neither are any of the wild animals
that inhabit the districts infested by it--a circumstance seeming
strange and inexplicable.

Note 2.  The "bultong" of the South Africans is meat cured in a similar
fashion to the _tasaio_ of the Mexicans, and _charqui_ of South America,
commonly know as "jerked beef."  The process is of great service in
countries where salt is a scarce commodity, or does not exist.



CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

CROSSING A "DRIFT."

As yet the alarmed emigrants had not decided on the direction to be
taken.  Up stream was that which led to the district of country they
were _treking_ to.  But to keep on the river's banks, wooded as these
were, might be to continue in the infested region, and they would
nothing gain by changing their place of encampment.  At rest, or moving,
their animals would become victims to the insects' venom all the same.
So before starting, a consultation was held to determine the route.
Hurried it was, and without unanimity of opinion.  Jan Van Dorn, leader
of the party, believed the tsetse had been brought thither by the
buffaloes, and was not anywhere else than just around that spot.  There
was much probability in this view, regarding the behaviour of these
animals in their mad rush and routing.  Not that they need have feared
the insect; as, unlike with domesticated cattle, its sting is never
fatal to them.  But it annoys, and often sets them on the run.  Despite
this likelihood, the other two _baases_, Blom and Rynwald, differed with
Van Dorn.  In their belief there was tsetse all along the stream, up and
down, and their best way would be to trek off from it inland--anywhere.

While they were still undecided, the Gordian knot was cut by their
guide, Smutz.  The nimble Hottentot had climbed, monkey-like, into the
highest branches of the mowana, where he commanded a far view of the
surrounding country; and from this elevated position had descried a
place of probable safety.  It was a range of high hills running parallel
with the river; a dry, rocky ridge without any sign of timber on it, and
therefore unlikely to be infested with the fly so much feared.

Shouting down his discovery, it brought their deliberations to an abrupt
end, with a resolve to make straight for the hills.  In any case it
would be but the loss of a day or two's time, with the toil of some
twenty miles' extra travel, the ridge appearing to be about ten or
twelve miles off.  But what of that, so long as it saved their stock
from destruction?  And, without further delay, the word went round for
starting; the oxen were whipped up, and the waggons moved off, leaving
the laager, late full of busy life, a deserted, desolate spot.

The river had still to be crossed, as they were on its southern side,
and the range of hills lay north.  But about this they anticipated no
difficulty; having examined the _drift_ on the day before, and found it
easily fordable.  When the attempt came to be made, however, it did not
prove so easy.  The rain-deluge of the preceding night, which half
drowned Piet Van Dorn among the ant-hills, had swept all over the
country, and the stream was now in freshet to full channel.

There were ways of getting the people across, the animals, too.  But the
waggons must wait for the subsidence of the waters.  Luckily, this had
commenced, and, as they could see, was going on rapidly.  Many South
African rivers rise to highest flood, to fall again within a few hours,
and such an one this appeared to be.  With glad eyes they saw it go down
by inches, as though the water were filtering into the earth underneath,
as well as running off down stream.

Confident it would soon be at its normal level, they did not think of
outspanning.  Instead, the oxen were kept attached to _dissel-boom_
[Note 1], and trek-touw; only the horsemen dismounting to make things
more trim for the passage across.

In an incredibly short space of time the water was low enough to attempt
it; and then arose a chorus of shouts, with cracking of whips, as
drivers, _achter-shambok_ men, and forelopers, urged the oxen down the
sloping bank into the stream's bed.  Not less was the fracas while the
fording was being made, every moment of it a continuance of encouraging
cries, and whip-cracks loud as pistol shots, till the three huge
vehicles were dragged out on the northern shore, high, but not dry;
instead, dripping wet up to their boxes.

The fording had been effected without serious accident, though
accompanied by one of a comical character, in which Andries Blom was the
conspicuous figure.  This ill-starred youth, now more than ever jealous
of Piet Van Dorn, while crossing the drift, rode close to the waggon
that carried Katharina Rynwald.  With the hope of re-establishing
himself in her good graces, he was making great show of solicitude for
her safety, as also display of his horsemanship.  This is a set-off
against Piet's late pitch out of the saddle, which had become known, and
his own account of it credited by all, save Andries himself.  The
latter, however, affected disbelief in it, insinuating that it was a
simple downright "throw," no hyena-hole, nor any other having aught to
do with it.  While wading his horse alongside the waggon, he had
sneeringly said as much to Katharina, to get for his pains a look of
reproachful scorn.  Stung by it, and the jealousy that tortured him, he
became reckless, spurring his horse angrily in front.  But the animal,
angered too, commenced pitching about, and tripping on the loose,
slippery stones in the stream's bed, went head over, not only sousing
its rider, but flinging him from the saddle.  As the two struggled out
upon the bank, paces apart, the laughter that from all sides saluted him
was bitter as though it came from the throats of fiends; all the more
that a sweet silvery voice took part in it, which he knew to be
Katharina's.

But the merriment at his discomfiture was of short duration.  Just then,
all were oppressed with an apprehension of the tsetse having already
done its deadly work, and that the fatal result would declare itself
later on.  It was not that, however, which brought their hilarity to an
end, abrupt as though a bombshell had burst in their midst.  This came
from a shout sent from the opposite side of the stream--that they had
just left--a cry of alarm.  Looking across, they saw one of the Caffres,
who had lingered behind at the laager to pick up odds and ends, coming
at full run down to the drift, as he ran, excitedly exclaiming,
"Olifants! olifants!"  (Elephants.)

What was there in this announcement to alarm them?  Instead, a
professional hunter would have hailed it with delight, thinking of ivory
and the gain to be got from it.  So might they, but for a spectacle
which on the instant after they had under their eyes.  Looking back upon
the open list, late traversed by them, they beheld a band of elephants,
nigh a hundred in number, in all likelihood the same met on their
midnight march across the Karoo.  But whether they, or others, the
danger was all the same and imminent.  The huge pachyderms were coming
over the veldt and in their usual fashion, single file, making straight
for the drift, and likely to cross there.  These sagacious animals know
all the waters within any district frequented by them--the springs,
vleys, and streams, with their fording places.  The herd was advancing
as if along an oft-trodden track, and the apprehension of the
Vee-Boers--a very fear--was not without sufficient cause.  Should the
elephants continue on over the stream, it would be sure destruction to
everything that chanced in their way.  The rush of the buffaloes, lately
dreaded, were as nothing to it.  It was now that the head _baas_, Jan
Van Dorn himself, assumed authoritative command, and gave display of his
intelligence; calling to the forelopers to lead off, with the drivers
and jambok men to whip up after.  The waggons were instantly switched to
one side, and clear of the track, which the elephants, left unmolested,
would be likely to take.  The driven cattle, too, were hurried out of
the way, the people at the same time seeking safety in concealment.

But the old jagers had no intention of leaving the olifants unmolested;
instead, he meant to make slaughter among them, and from their tusks get
some compensation for the loss sustained by that wholesale poisoning of
sheep.

He had barely time to arrange his battery--all the available guns
belonging to the party--as the leading elephant, a grand old tusker,
with ears big as carriage umbrellas, entered the open list in the
timber, the rest still following in file.  Though going only in a walk,
it was with a stride that carried them along fast as most other animals
in full run, and in a few seconds after the tusker stood on the stream's
bank; then with a flourish of trumpets, and a whirl of his flexible
trunk, struck straight down into the water.

But never to go out of it again alive, on his own legs.  Scarce had he
wetted his huge hooves, when he was saluted by a fusillade from the
opposite side that not only tumbled himself over, but five or six of his
fellows following immediately behind, some of them wounded, some killed
outright.  The rest of the herd took instant affright and wheeling
round, went off in wild rush, no longer aligned, but in scattered
confusion, breaking through the bushes in every direction.

When the waggons were again drawn back upon track, and moved off inland,
in addition to their usual loading, they carried several hundred pounds
weight of valuable ivory.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  The "dissel-boom" of a waggon is the pole to which the hind
oxen are attached, the others in front drawing by the trek-touw.



CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

A CAMP FULL OF CARCASSES.

Another encampment of the Vee-Boers, their three waggons as before,
forming its substantial centre.  In almost everything else it is
different from that under the baobab, being situated in a _kloof_ [Note
1] between two rocky ridges, which, trending towards one another, meet
and form a sort of _cul-de-sac_.  The valley's bottom is of some
breadth, grass--covered but treeless, save some stunted bushes scattered
thinly over it, with here and there a tall camel-thorn, from which hang
the purse-like pensile nests of a colony of weaver birds.  The ridges
are of basalt, and along their slopes lie huge boulders, some
square-shaped and big as houses; other similar blocks being strewn about
on the level below.  Just over the camp, and shadowing it from the sun,
is a high _kop_ [Note 2], on whose ledges cling aloes, euphorbias, and
other plants, characteristic of desert vegetation; for all is
barrenness, above and around, the bottom land alone showing any sign of
fertility.  This last is due to a spring, which, issuing from the
cliff's base, trickles down the valley, to be caught in a little pool,
some hundred paces below.  Being a permanent fontein, it afforded
sufficient water for all the animals when they wanted it.  But few of
them want it now; most being dead, whilst those that survive are in
death's throes, without hope of recovery.  The fatal work begun by the
tulp, is being finished by the tsetse; good as finished already--and the
migrating graziers will soon be without stock of any kind, horse, ox, or
cow.  Even their dogs are dead or dying.

This wholesale fatality, as they have since ascertained, was brought
about by the buffaloes; some of the people, sent back to the river
higher up, having there found no signs of the venomous insect.  They had
gone with a view to continuing the journey; but before a fresh start
could be made, the too well-known symptoms of tsetse-sickness had
declared themselves, and all thoughts of treking further were
relinquished.

For the first forty-eight hours the effect of the poison had not been
perceptible, and there was a hope of the animals escaping.  A hope which
had to be abandoned when they began to water at the eyes, and run at the
nostrils, their hair standing on end as in the midst of an arctic
winter, while they were under the hottest of tropical suns.  Soon after
came swelling of the jaws, scouring, with consequent emaciation,
weakness to staggering; some actually going mad, as with hydrophobia,
and having to be shot.  All would have been shot ere this, but for a
lingering, half-despairing belief that some might still get over it.

This is now gone; many of them have been buried; and of those above
ground, the dying lie mingled with the dead, groaning and moaning
piteously.

When at length comes the conviction that all are doomed, the fiat goes
forth to put the suffering creatures out of pain.  The guns are again
brought into requisition; a brisk, though reluctant, fusillade follows,
and the camp is left without a living quadruped.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

For a time there was silence, profound and solemn as that which succeeds
the firing over a soldier's grave.  Every one sate despondent, or stood
in listless attitude, ignorant of what was next to be done.  They but
knew that to remain there would be out of the question, while treking
away with their waggons was no longer possible.  These huge vehicles,
now teamless, with their white canvas covers, were as ships becalmed in
mid-ocean; all sails set, but not a breath of wind to blow them on.  And
the migrating Boers themselves might be likened to shipwrecked sailors--
castaways on a desert shore--for not much better was their situation.
Around they saw the ruin of their hopes, the wreck of their fortunes,
but nothing of what lay before them, or beyond.

Under such circumstances no wonder at their being sad and despondent.

But if silent, not so was the scene around.  Throughout the kloof were
noises enough, and more than enough, since all were disagreeable to
their ears.  Skulking among the rocks and bushes, the jackal gave out
its long--drawn, lugubrious whine, in concert with the wild, hysterical
laughter of the hyena; while from the ledges above came the hoarse
wah-wah of baboons, as though these quadrumana were afflicted with
colds, and all the time clearing their throats.

Along the cliff's crest were perched vultures of various species,
sunning themselves, with wings outstretched, now and then uttering harsh
croaks as they contemplated the rich banquet below, soon to be ready for
their beaks.  [Note 3.]  Eagles, soaring high in air, meant partaking of
it also, as betokened by their necks craned downwards, and screams of
eager concupiscence.

An interval having elapsed, and the necessity for action forcing itself
upon his mind, the head baas, Jan Van Dorn, summoned his two associates
into council, for deliberation on what should be done.

A flat-topped stone near the centre of the camp offered a convenient
seat, and, sitting down upon it--all three pipe in mouth--the leader
thus delivered himself--

"Brothers! we're in a bad way now; it couldn't well be worse."

"Ya--ya, that is true," responded the others in a breath, Blom adding--

"Nach Mynheer Jan, it couldn't possibly be worse."

"Then what ought we to do, think you?"

To which merely formal question Van Dorn received no answer, the other
two tacitly puffing away at their pipes in expectation that he would
tell them.  Accustomed to this sort of deference the old jager no longer
held back, but proceeded to unburden himself, saying--

"Well, brothers; the first thing we must do is to look out for our
lives--our very lives.  And it's the only thing we can do now.  To keep
on to the place we were making for, even though sure of reaching it,
wouldn't help us a bit.  Without our cattle we'd be no better off there
than here; and now that our horses and dogs are gone too, there's but
small chance for us subsisting by the chase.  Once our ammunition gave
out, we'd be just as Bosjesmen, have to live on roots and reptiles.
That's not the life for a Vee-Boer, nor the diet either."

"_Gott der himmel_, no!" was the deprecatory exclamation of Blom, sent
forth between two puffs of smoke.

"So," continued Van Dorn, "I see no hope for us but return to the
Transvaal."

"Neither I.  Nor I," assented the associate baases, Rynwald adding
interrogatively--

"But, Mynheer Jan, how are we to get back there?"

This was just the trouble that stared all in the face, and had been in
their thoughts ever since the tsetse-sickness first made its appearance
among the stock.  For in their thoughts, also, was the Karoo they had
lately crossed with so much difficulty and danger.  This when they had
all the means of transport, waggons to carry their women, children,
provisions, and other effects, with horses to ride upon.  What would be
the recrossing it without these, and afoot?  Impossible, as Van Dorn
well knew; and so declared, saying--

"Overland, brothers, we never could get back.  We are more than three
hundred miles from Zoutpansberg, the nearest settlement of our people,
as you know.  Some of us might hold out to reach it, but not all; only
the strongest.  The weak ones, our dear ones, would many of them perish
by the way.  Need I say more?"

"No--no!" promptly responded Rynwald, thinking of a wife and only
daughter, the fair Katharina.  "That's enough, Mynheer Jan.  We mustn't
attempt to go back over the Karoo; it would be our ruin, as you say."

"Then how are we to go?" demanded Blom.  "What other way?"

"By _water_," answered the head baas.  "We must make down the river, and
on to the sea."

"What river are you speaking of?"

"The Limpopo.  The stream we've just left should run into it, not a
great way below; and the Limpopo itself empties somewhere to the
northward of Delagoa Bay.  I have heard there is a Portugese settlement,
a small port near its mouth, where whalers and coasting vessels
occasionally call.  If we can reach that, 'twill give us a chance to get
down the coast to Port Natal, and then over the Drakenbergs back home."

"That would be a long voyage," suggested Blom, "full of all sorts of
dangers, too."

"In time not near so long as by land, and not half as many dangers
either--if we have luck."

"Ay, if we have luck.  But suppose we haven't?"

"We must take the chances, Mynheer Hans; all the more as there's no help
for it.  But I'm sure it's our best way."

"So I," seconded Rynwald.

"But," said Blom, less objecting than to get a clearer comprehension of
what their chief intended, "you don't propose our descending the river
afoot--tramping along the banks, do you?"

"Certainly not!  That would be a trudge to take time, indeed; harder
than crossing the Kalahari [Note 4] itself.  We'll sail down to the
sea."

"But what about boats?  We have none."

"We must do without them--build rafts, which in a way will be better
than boats."

"Oh! that's your idea, Mynheer Jan.  I suppose it's a good one, and for
the best.  Well, I'm willing too.  So let us make it a water journey."

The other two having already pronounced in favour of this, the
consultation came to a close by Van Dorn saying--

"And, brothers; the sooner we start the better.  We can gain nothing by
staying longer in this tainted spot; but may lose something--our health,
likely, if not our very lives."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  "Kloof," the Boer's designation of a valley of the ravine
order.

Note 2.  The "kop" is a cliff-like promontory overhanging a valley or
plain, nearly synonymous with the American "bluff."  It is, doubtless,
the Dutch radix of our word _cape_.

Note 3.  There are no less than seven distinct species of vultures
inhabiting South Africa; while the species of eagles are still more
numerous.

Note 4.  "Kalahari," the name of the great South African desert, or
Karoo, which extends north from the Orange River, and west of the
Transvaal, for hundreds of miles.  Its borders, and some parts of its
interior, are inhabited by Bushmen and Bechuanas.



CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

A CARNIVAL OF THE CARNIVORA.

Needless to say that Van Dorn's last words, pointing to the urgency of
immediate departure, were convincing to his associate baases, had they
stood in need of conviction.  But neither did; they, as he, being but
too glad to get away from a scene where they had suffered so much loss,
to say nothing of the misery.  The spectacle now under their eyes was
itself sufficiently disagreeable, seeming a very charnel-house.  Scores
of carcasses lay in and around the camp; and, as the hot sun continued
to burn down upon them, the effluvia was every moment becoming more
offensive, and would soon be unbearable.  True, they could be buried as
those first dying had been.  But, for days past, an understanding
prevailed that the encampment was to be changed, time and place alone
remaining undetermined.  The former had now come, and the latter been
also resolved upon; no new ground, but one familiar to them--in short,
that they had so lately and hurriedly abandoned.

They need have no fear of re-occupying it, nor had they.  Tsetses might
be swarming there thick as midges in midsummer; but nothing cared they
now.  The only hurt these insects could hereafter do was by their
presence to remind them of the damage already done, recalling dissipated
hopes and expectations.  So far as the accursed fly was concerned,
however, it was no longer thought of; and all were full of eagerness to
be back under the mowana.  They had pleasant remembrance of the hours
spent beneath its shade, so different from that of the kop, which but
gave them shadow when the sun had either not reached, or passed
meridian.  Besides, on the river's banks grew trees of many kinds,
affording edible fruits, some even delicious.  No wonder, then, at the
general joy, when it became known they were to move back to the river.

The prospect inspired every one, as it were, with new life; and when the
moving commenced, as on the instant it did, all hastened to lend hand of
help.  For there was much work to be done, big burdens to be carried in
the transference of their effects from camp to camp.  And it would take
more than one trip ere completed.

The women and children were marched off first, even these carrying loads
proportioned to their strength.  And with them went the first batch of
regular carriers, to be followed by another, soon as the packages were
made ready for transport; then another, and so on--all to return again.
Thus down the ten miles of slope between mountain range and river passed
a continuous stream of men bearing burdens, like ants on return to their
hills; the same men soon after going back upward, unweighted, and with
light elastic step.  Only the downward journey was accomplished on the
first day, as it was late ere they had commenced it.  But on the second
they made the "round trip," and more; three times traversing the space
between the camps.

Not all were of the last party that returned to the hills, only a
certain number needing to go thither now.  Most of the effects intended
for removal had been got down on the second day, the waggons alone
remaining in the kloof.  Of course these cumbrous vehicles, of no use
now, would be left behind; but not their tilts.  These, sure to prove of
good service afterwards, were to be fetched away, and it was chiefly for
them the carriers had come back.  The party consisted of half-a-dozen
young Boers, with about twice the number of Caffres and Hottentots, Piet
Van Dorn having charge of it.

The sun had set ere they re-entered the old camp; and as all were fagged
out by the incessant toil of the two days, their thoughts alone dwelt
upon rest and sleep.  The return journey, their last, was to be made on
the following morning, and there was no necessity for further work that
night.  So they at once betook them to their respective sleeping-places;
the young white men climbing into the waggons, their native attendants,
wrapped in _karosses_ [Note 1] laying themselves along the ground
underneath.

Soon all were buried in a profound slumber; the dismantled camp around
them silent as a cemetery.  But it was a silence of short duration.
Scarce had they become unconscious, ere getting awakened by sounds which
robbed them of the power of sleep, if not its desire.  For their ears
were saluted with the cries of wild beasts, coming from every side, and
of so many kinds, it seemed as if all the predatory species of Africa
were assembled within the kloof.  In point of fact, most were there,
attracted from far and near by the scent of the dead animals, whose
carcasses were now far gone in decomposition.  On previous nights there
had been something of the same, though never such a racket as now.  Then
fires had been kept burning to frighten the beasts off; but this night
being warm, and the last they were to spend on that spot--tired, too,--
the young men had neglected taking such precaution; imprudently, as all
saw, when startled out of their sleep by the roar of a lion, multiplied
in loud reverberation along the adjacent cliffs.  It was but the prelude
of a horrible chorus quick succeeding, in which could be distinguished
the angry "gurr" of the leopard, the spiteful snarl of the cheetah, and
the cat-like miaulling of the serval.  Hyenas of different species
alternatively howled, chattered, and laughed, while jackals contributed
their snappish bark to the fear-inspiring din.

Fear-inspiring it was to those freshly awakened; all the more when,
after rubbing their eyes, they looked off, to see a sight which made
their flesh creep, and blood run cold.  No wonder.  Over the camp-ground
were lions, leopards, and the other sorts, thick as sheep in a pen, in
all attitudes, and every variety of action; some tugging and tearing at
the carcasses, others in dispute about pieces already severed: still
others rushing to and fro in quest of a stray morsel.  The moon shining
in full effulgence rendered them distinguishable, almost as by daylight;
while on the still calm air within the kloof, the roaring, growling,
yelping, and howling, all repeated in echo from the cliffs, combined to
make a very Pandemonium.

Fortunate for those who listened that the tilts were still upon the
waggons, with end curtains of strong stuff to draw close--in part
designed for just such a danger.  In a trice everybody was inside them--
white, black, and yellow--the flaps pulled to, and all made safe as
might be.  Still the situation was one of greatest peril.  What if,
after eating the dead animals, the devourers should turn their attention
to the living men, and make a burst through the canvas?  The stroke of
lion's paw, or leopard's either, would tear that screen to sheds as
though it were but tissue-paper, and they, concealing themselves under
it, well knew this.  But they knew also, that if left unmolested, more
likely the fierce brutes, having filled their bellies, would retire from
the ground, and give no further trouble.

For a time they were so left; but not long.  The position was too
ticklish and irksome for continued endurance.  The young Boers, deprived
of their rest, and kept in such a stretch of apprehension, soon began to
chafe at it, till their impatience became anger, rendering them
reckless.  Besides there was one always eager to distinguish himself as
a hunter, and never might such opportunity occur again.  This was Piet
Van Dorn, who at length casting all prudence aside, proposed opening
fire on the enemy.  Being chief of the party, and with controlling
power, his proposal was unanimously agreed to; and, in less than five
minutes after, the brutes making such noise over the camp-ground, heard
other noises that were new to them--the cracking of guns--at the same
time saw puffs of smoke, with jets of flame, darting out from the white
covers of the waggons.

Surprise, with some fear, hushed the wild beasts into a momentary
silence; the cowardly _canidae_--hyenas and jackals--scampering off at
the first fire.  But the fiercer and more courageous felines kept their
ground, till a second volley had been sent into their midst; then only
moving away with sullen reluctance, some even staying to receive a third
discharge from the death-dealing guns.  But of those that thus stayed,
not many got off afterwards.  The clear moonlight afforded a fine chance
for sure aim, and the young Boers--all best marksmen--made deadly play
with their roers, scarce missing a shot.

In fine, the camp was cleared of its fierce four-footed invaders, save
those that had fallen.  And of these could be counted a goodly array;
four lions, with two lionesses, three leopards, and a couple of
cheetahs!

Their pelts, stripped off the next morning, added to the weight
requiring transport.  But the young jagers could make light of this
additional lading, in anticipation of the triumph such spoils would
secure them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  "Kaross."  A wrap of blanket size and shape, made of the skins
of wild animals stitched together; they are worn by most of the
uncivilised natives of South Africa.  Various sorts of skins are used in
their manufacture; those of the leopard and cheetah, or hunting-leopard,
forming the distinctive garb of a chief.



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.

WATER-HORSES.

Over a week has elapsed, and the Vee-Boers are still in their old camp
under the baobab.  Its appearance is much the same as during their
former occupation of it--that is, the portion inside the laager-fence.
For though the waggons are absent, their arched covers, supported on
short uprights, stand just as they stood, now doing service as tents.
They are the sleeping-places of the women and children, also giving
shelter to such household gods as need the protection of a roof.

To speak of a Vee-Boer having household gods may seem a misnomer, since
he never has a house.  Still there are certain Penates he carries about;
the most cherished being a black-letter Bible, large as a volume of the
"Encyclopedia Britannica," in thick leather binding, with brass clasps.
This ponderous tome goes with him, wander where he will; for the South
African Dutchman is strong in the protestation of religion, whatever his
practice of it.

There had been one such Bible in each of the three waggons--the
respective belongings of the families, Van Dorn, Blom, and Rynwald--and,
it need scarce be said, that these sacred volumes were not left behind
in the kloof.

Outside, on the veldt, all is different.  The groups of grazing stock
are no more seen there--not a single head; while close to the laager's
edge appears a new feature, a "_hartebeest house_" [Note 1] late
erected.  It is for the young whites of the party; the native employes
contenting themselves with such coigns of shelter as are afforded by the
trunks of the mowanas.  In these, some have ingeniously hewn out
cavities, large enough to give them lodgment, others having in like
manner utilised the adjacent ant-hills.

All this bespeaks prolonged residence there, and not far off is a
spectacle, showing the reason; telling also they have not been idle in
the interval.  Down on the river's bank by the drift is a scene of
greatest activity, where some scores of logs have been collected, and
are being made ready for the timbers of rafts.  They are the trunks of
_koker-booms_, [Note 2] each about eleven feet in length, with a
diameter of three.  Their top-knots of bayonetlike leaves having been
lopped off, they are now in process of desiccation, by huge fires that
have been kindled around them.  When the sap is drawn out, they will be
light as cork wood, just the material required for raft-building.

Jan Van Dorn himself superintends this quaint naval architecture, by
good luck having skilled assistants.  As it chances, among the native
employes are two _Macobas_ [Note 3] of Lake Ngami--fugitive from the
tyranny of King Letchoulatebe--who understand all about the various
kinds of craft used in South African inland navigation, and under their
hands the rafts will be properly constructed.

Nor is this the only industry in progress.  On the other side of the
camp, out upon the open veldt, a number of the young Boers are busy too,
their work being the conversion of fresh meat into bultong.  Strips of
it hang over riems extended between the trees, where these stand thinly,
so as not to shadow it from the sun.  It was the same on a former
occasion, but the meat is not the same.  Then it was buffalo-beef, which
has been all lost.  For at the time of their hurried abandonment of the
place, it was not thought sufficiently cured to be taken along, and it
was their intention to return for it.  Unluckily, left hanging too low,
the hyenas and jackals had dragged it down, and devoured it to the last
scrap.  The sausage-like strings now replacing it, are the flesh of
elands, and other large antelopes, the carcass of a giraffe having
contributed to the stock.  While the raft-builders had been busy with
axe and bill-hook, the hunters were alike industrious in the chase, and
have already laid in a good store of provisions for the proposed voyage.
It may be a long one--how long they cannot tell--and in descending the
rivers they might not easily find subsistence for such a numerous party.
At all events, the precaution is a wise one, and fortune has favoured
them in it, by guiding many wild animals toward the drift; some on their
way to drink, others intending to cross over.  They have enough meat now
to last them for weeks--even months--once it becomes bultong; and, to
insure its becoming this of the best, light fires are kept underneath
it, whose gentle heat, with the smoke, assists in the curing process.

Nor are the voyagers to be dependent on an exclusively meat diet.  There
are yet left them several bags of meal, both of maize and Caffre-corn
[Note 4]; while, as already said, the trees standing near bear a variety
of edible fruits and nuts, some of which are being added to the intended
"ship's stores."  Collecting these is the task of the youngsters; so
all, young and old, have something or other to do.  And they are doing
it with all their might and will.  For even the youngest now know that
their situation is one of uncertainty and peril; dangers on the spot,
with other dangers ahead, the avoidance of which calls for every
exertion.

Another week has passed, showing much progress made.  In short, the
rafts are finished, and afloat on the water.  There are three of them,
corresponding to the three families who make up the migrant party.  It
was not for this, however, that a trio was constructed; but because of
the stream being too shoal and narrow to admit of a raft large enough to
carry all.  That is a thing to be thought of when they reach the great
river below.

Each of the three built has a breadth of beam of some ten to twelve
feet, in correspondence with the length of the koker-booms; whose
trunks, laid side by side, have been firmly lashed together by lianas--
the _Baavian-touw_ [Note 5].  Lengthwise, the rafts are nearly four
times as much, from stem to stern being about forty feet.  On what might
be called the quarter-deck of each, one of the waggon-tilts has been
placed on supporting stanchions, and is the cabin.  On the fore, also,
is a sort of shed or round house, roofed over with reeds and palm
leaves, for the accommodation of the crew.  A huge pile occupies the
main deck, leaving a narrow passage or gangway on either side, for the
polemen and rowers.  Over it are spread the skins of wild animals lately
killed, now utilised as tarpaulings, to give protection to a variety of
effects--in short, the general cargo.  Amidships, on each raft, is a
little platform of clay, raised some eight or ten inches above the
timber's level.  That is the hearth, intended for culinary purposes.  In
fine, upon the extreme stern, abaft the cabin of bamboos and canvas, a
long broad-bladed oar, balanced on a pivot, is to do the rudder-work.

At length everything being in readiness for embarking, it was begun
without further delay.  Nor was there any in the carrying it out; for,
as with the camp in the kloof, all were now eager to move away from this
one.  True, the place had been of some service to them; nevertheless was
it fraught with most unpleasant memories.  It was there the tsetse first
assailed their stock to its final and total destruction, not only
beggaring them, but putting their lives in peril.  So, almost as
hurriedly as the inhabitants of a burning house flee from the fire, did
they make for the rafts when these were ready to receive them.

The embarkation was accomplished in good order, and without accident.
The cables, which were the old trek-touws of the abandoned waggons,
being hauled in, and the huge structures, one after another, shoved out
to mid-stream, they went gliding gently down.

But they were not the only craft to take departure from that
landing-place; a score of others accompanying them, of a quaintly
curious kind--being _water-horses_.  Each consisted of a single trunk of
koker-boom, with a peg of about fifteen inches in length fastened firmly
to it, and standing upright near the fore.  Lying flat along the log,
face downwards, rode a naked native--Caffre or Hottentot--with one hand
holding the peg, the other acting partly as an outrigger for balance,
and partly for propulsion.  The legs, too, astraddle, and trailing in
the water behind, helped the onward movement, as in swimming; so that
the water-horses could be put to a speed far beyond that of the cumbrous
rafts.  Around these their riders darted in high glee, laughing,
shouting, and splashing one another, as a flock of ducks fresh entered
upon a pond.

The purpose of this aquatic cavalry was twofold; in part meant as a
ready means of communication with the banks, and partly to avoid
overcrowding the rafts.  Moreover, many of the natives, used to such
navigation, rather liked it; especially that now, under a broiling sun,
it enabled then to dip their bodies at will, and keep them comfortably
cool.

The "water-horse," as described, is often brought into requisition by
the Caffres and other South African natives.  They are found of great
service in the crossing of wide rivers, especially when cattle and sheep
have to be got over.  Then the water-horsemen guide the animals, and
swimming alongside assist the weaker ones and young calves.

Thus joyously the rafters began their voyage, at its outset to be
treated to a laughable spectacle, as when crossing in flight from the
tsetse.  Though they had lost all their quadrupeds, there was still a
creature with them of the animal kind--if a monkey may be so classed.
It was the pet of Katharine Rynwald, but also favoured the Hottentot
guide, Smutz, who, for its young mistress's sake, had been accustomed to
show it kindness.  As the odd flotilla moved off, Smutz bestrode one of
the water-horses, and shooting past the foremost raft, on which sate the
young girl with the monkey in her lap, the latter made a long outward
leap, alighting upon his back; then fixing itself firm and square on his
shoulders, there squatted composedly.  The two facing in the same
direction, with the round, bullet-like cranium of the Hottentot,
surmounted by that of the monkey, it was as if some water Cerberus, or
double-headed hydra, were conducting the squadron down stream.

But the incident was too comical to be looked upon as an evil omen;
instead, it elicited peals of laughter, with applauding shouts; all
inclined to regard it as the forecast of a prosperous voyage.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  The "Hartebeest-house" is a hut of rude construction, the usual
materials being reeds and grass with a plastering of mud.  The name is
derived from a fancied resemblance to the form of the antelope so
called.  Hartebeest-houses are common throughout Southern Africa, not
inhabited by natives, but the poorer class of colonists, especially
Vee-Boers when not on the move.

Note 2.  The "Koker-boom" is a species of aloe with a short thick trunk.
When well dried the wood is even lighter than cork.

Note 3.  The "Macobas" are the boatmen of Lake Ngami.  They have
affinity with the Bechuanas; but are of a race and class apart.  They
are also of darker complexion.

Note 4.  Both Indian corn (_maize_) and Caffre-corn (_Sorghum
Caffrorum_) are cultivated in Southern Africa, and the meal of both is
in common use among the Boers of the Transvaal.  The Caffres also grow
large quantities of another species of Sorghum (_S. Saccharatum_) for
the sake of its stem; which they chew, as the negroes of America do
sugar-cane, its juice being equally as sweet.

Note 5.  The "Baavian-touw" (_Anglice_, "_baboon-rope_") is a species of
climbing plant, or liana, with long stems and heart-shaped leaves.  By
the Boers it is employed as cordage, and for many purposes, this
primitive sort of rope being often convenient, where no other is
obtainable.



CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.

A RIVER RUN OUT.

The stream on which the Vee-Boers had embarked was unknown to all of
them.  Even their guide was unacquainted with it, though he had once
accompanied a party of English hunters to a point farther north than
where they now where.  By its general direction it should run into the
Limpopo, which river they had crossed some days before, on their trek
northward.  But where it joined the latter, and how far below, as also
the character of the stream itself, were questions undetermined.

Nor knew they much more of the Limpopo.  Van Dorn had been on it farther
down, at the place where Smutz and the hunting party passed over; but
neither he nor the Hottentot had followed its course for any great
distance.  They were acquainted with but ten or fifteen miles of its
course, beyond which all was _terra incognita_ to them, or, as the baas
in his Dutch vernacular expressed it, "verder onbekend."

Thus they had entered on a voyage, whose termination hinged on many
uncertainties, and might be prolonged by many delays, to say nought of
the dangers.

For the first day, however, all went well.  The buoyant koker-booms
acted admirably, keeping the decks, with all lading on them, high and
dry.  The current, too, while smooth, was sufficiently rapid to give
them good way, without requiring the use of either pole or paddle.  All
that needed doing was to keep in mid-stream, on account of its
narrowness, and that was of easy accomplishment with the powerful stern
oars working on their pivots.  Large as were the rafts, and heavily
laden, so light were their timbers, that when swirl or side current
threatened to bring them against the bank, the weakest man on board
might be safely entrusted with the steering.  Craft of no kind could
have been more obedient to the rudder, a matter of much pride and boast
to the Macobas, who had the credit of their construction.

But, indeed, all the people were in the most exuberant of spirits.
Moving on without any physical exertion--a smooth gliding motion, as on
skates or in a sleigh--was of itself a pleasure, which the continuous
changing of the scenery, with many sights new to them, intensified to
very delight.  It was as though they were out on a holiday excursion, or
yachting trip, and for the time they thought not of dangers that might
be before them, while alike oblivious of the perils they had late passed
through.

The enjoyment was general throughout all the day; the water-cavalry
skirmishing around with much shouting and laughter.  There was racing
also, with bets made by the young Boers, each laying on his favourite.

In these aquatic contests the Caffres were mostly victorious, though
Smutz ably upheld the honour of the Hottentot race.  The Macobas took no
part in them, being on board the rafts, and occupied with their
navigation.

As evening approached the "horse play" came to an end, for now there was
work to be done: the rafts to be brought up to the bank, and made fast
to moorings.  To keep drifting on in the dark would be madness itself,
as who could tell what was below?  There might be rapids, or worse
danger still--a waterfall.  Jan Van Dorn was too cautious to run any
such risk; so, as the twilight began to fling its purple mantle over
stream and bordering woodlands, he called out the command to draw in,
pointing to the spot that appeared best for a landing-place.  This was
in a bend where the current was sluggish, and the banks of slight
elevation; for to beach such unwieldy craft in a swift-running stream is
not only a difficulty but a danger.  In the present case it was
accomplished without accident; and the three soon lay alongside the
bank, each cabled to a tree, with a gangway plank run out, over which
all swarmed ashore, women, children, and men.  Water-travelling was a
novelty to them; and, though not yet irksome, the return to land was
welcome by way of relaxation.

Supper was eaten on shore, though not there cooked, as the culinary
arrangement on the rafts was of a superior order, better than any
improvised affair of the gipsy kind.  But what mattered it where the
repast was prepared, so long as it was enjoyable, and enjoyed? which it
was by our voyagers, one and all of them.  For one and all were now
hungry, having that day eaten the morgen-maal at a much earlier hour
than usual.  It was the last cooked in the ant-hill kitchen-range; since
when long time had passed, and with the fresh, breezy air of the river
their appetites were sharpened to keenness.

Soon as the meal was over all retired to rest, some on board, others
preferring to seek repose on shore, under the trees.  It was warm enough
anywhere, and more than enough, the heat not only being a discomfort of
itself, but subjecting them to torture from mosquitoes.

These troublesome insects were in swarms--myriads--and made it all but a
sleepless night to many.  Even the Caffres, notwithstanding their
greased and ochre-coated skins, suffered the same, every now and then
one or other taking a plunge into the river by way of soothing the
irritation.

Joyously all hailed the return of daylight, which chased the persecutors
away.  And they were merry again over the morgen-maal, which they ate
before leaving the landing-place.  Nor was their hilarity less, after
they had parted from moorings, and were once more in mid-stream, moving
onwards.  The delight of yesterday's downward glide, with its many
pleasant incidents, led them to anticipate the same all along.

A disappointment it proved, as with most other matters of too sanguine
expectation.  For a few miles farther the current carried them smoothly
as on the day before, and they made good way.  But then things began to
change, the stream becoming wider with a slower flow.  This, they could
see, was constantly decreasing, and at length ended in complete
stagnation, as though the water were dammed up below.

Now, for the first time, had they to take to oars and poling, the poles
serving best in such shallow water.  For they found it to be less than a
fathom's depth, and still getting shallower as they pushed onward.  But
they had not much farther onward to go, nor could they.  Another mile or
so and the rafts, all three, became grounded.  Just what Jan Van Dorn
had been for some time apprehending--_the river was run out_!



CHAPTER NINETEEN.

A CONGREGATION OF CROCODILES.

Yes; the river had run out, or, to speak more correctly, run in,
underground.  Its channel was there extending on ahead of them, a belt
of silver-white sand, hollow in the centre, and with a bordering of
brown, withered reeds.  But no water in it; not a drop, nor the sign of
such, far as they could see, though commanding a view of it to more than
a mile's distance.  For they were looking down an Omaramba, a river's
bed, in which water flows only in the season of inundation, at other
times sinking into the earth, to filter away underneath.  To the
Vee-Boers the thing was neither strange nor new.  In their migrations
they had met the like before, and ofttimes; for a stream periodically
dried up is no rare phenomenon in Southern Africa, nor indeed in other
parts of the world.  The same occurs in Asia, notably in Australia, as
also in both divisions of the American continent.  Nor is it unknown in
the eastern countries of Europe, by the Black and Caspian Seas.

To our voyagers, then, it was less a surprise than vexation--indeed,
bitter disappointment.  All the time spent in the construction of the
rafts, all their labour lost, to say nought of the helpless, hopeless
situation they were now placed in!

But was it so helpless or hopeless?  That remained to be seen;
fortunately so, else they might have despaired indeed.  They did not
yet, nor could they, till the question had answer--

"How far does the dried-up channel extend?"

To determine this was, of course, the next step, with little else
thought of, till it was determined.  An exploring party, with Smutz to
conduct it, was at once landed from the rafts, and set off down the
sandy strip.  Going in all haste they were soon lost to view among the
reeds and bushes at its lower end.  Then their reappearance was looked
for with eagerness, gradually becoming anxiety as time passed.  For the
longer they were out of sight, the greater should be the distance to
running water again, if such were to be found at all.

They were gone above two hours, which looked bad.  But on return, as
they drew near, an expression was visible on their faces, which
betokened the contrary.  The report they brought was that the stream,
with abundance of water, issued forth again about five miles below.

This was as favourable as Jan Van Dorn had expected, and, in concert
with the other baases, he had conceived a plan, now to be acted on.  The
rafts were to be taken apart, and, with their lading, transported
overland piecemeal.  Their lading had been already put ashore, as river,
or no river, they could be of no further service there.  But they would
be below, as much as ever, and it was only a question of portage.

The work was at once set about, the huge structures dismembered, beam by
beam, and dragged out on the dry strand.  Then a stream of carriers
commenced moving along the track where water had once streamed, each
with a koker-boom log on his shoulders, that seemed as though it would
crush him under its weight.  With their naked, bronzed bodies, they
looked like so many Atlases bearing worlds, though, in reality, their
loads were of the lightest.

Down the omaramba went they, and up again, to and fro, till the last
beam had been transported from water to water, with oars, poles, ropes,
and all the other paraphernalia, the cargoes being conveyed in like
manner.  It took time though; all the remainder of that day, and the
forenoon of the following, while another day and a half were consumed in
the reconstruction of the rafts.  An easy task it was, compared with the
original building of them, the place of everything being now known,
deck-timbers with their attachments, steering gear, the fixing of the
cabins and sheds, even to the stowage of the goods and chattels.

On the morning of the fourth day, all was ready for re-embarking, which
commenced as soon as breakfast had been eaten.  Then off again started
the flotilla, water-horses, and everything as before.  But not as before
carried along by the current, since there was none.

Nor in its absence did the rafters see anything amiss.  The place of
their re-embarkation was at the inner and upper end of a narrow leit,
which widened abruptly below.  Once down there, they would find the
stream flowing, and get into its current.  So supposed they, while
pulling and poling on.

Soon, however, to be undeceived, and sadly.  After passing the point
where the leit terminated, they still found no flow; instead, the water
stagnant as in a tan-pit.  It stretched before them in a sheet of
smooth, unrippled surface, nearly a mile in length, with a width of two
or three hundred yards, again narrowing at the lower end, where it
entered among trees.  On each side it was bordered by a ribbon of sandy
beach, which would have been white, but for an array of dark forms that
lay thickly over it, giving it a mottled or striated appearance.  The
sun had not yet dissipated the film which hung over the water, and, seen
through this, they might have been mistaken for trunks of trees,
stranded when the stream was in flood.

But the Vee-Boers knew better; knew them to be living creatures--the
most repulsive of all in the world of animated nature--for they were
crocodiles.  Of different sizes were they: from ten or twelve feet in
length to twice as long; the larger ones having bodies thick as an
ordinary barrel; their bulk, too, exaggerated by the magnifying effect
of the mist.

There would have been nothing in that, nor their presence there, to
cause surprise, but for their numbers.  All along the stream, crocodiles
had been observed at intervals, basking on the banks, sometimes three or
four together.  But here were so many hundreds, the strip of beach on
both shores literally black with them.  They were in all attitudes, some
lying flat and at full stretch, others with heads erect and jaws wide
apart; still others holding the tail high in air with a turn back
towards the body, or laid in crescent curve along the surface of the
sand.  But all motionless, the only movement observable among them being
made by birds of the insect--eating species, a number of which sate
perched on their shoulders, every now and then flittering off to catch
flies that swarmed around the reptiles, alighting on their foul,
ill-odoured skins.

Although an astounding and fear-inspiring spectacle, they upon the rafts
were, in a manner, prepared for it.  On the nights preceding they had
heard loud noises below, as the bellowing of a hundred bulls, knowing
them to be caused by crocodiles, and only wondering that there were so
many in one place.  Now seeing the reptiles themselves their wonder was
undiminished, with no clearer comprehension of why they were thus
congregated.

Nor learnt they the reason till later on, no time being then allowed
them to think of it; for scarce had the rafts emerged from the narrow
leit when the birds, sighting them, rose up into the air, uttering
shrill cries of alarm.

On the saurians the effect was instantaneous.  Hitherto motionless, and
many of them asleep, all became at once active; their activity displayed
by a quick uprising on their short, thick legs, and a hurried crawl for
the water.  It was their place of safety, as instinct admonished them,
and the rafters supposed they were but retreating from an enemy yet
unknown to them.  Soon to be undeceived, and find it was no retreat, but
an intended attack, themselves the object of it!  For although the
crocodiles on plunging in, went under, and were for a time out of sight,
they came to the surface again, now nearer the rafts, a line on either
side of them.  In threatening attitude too, heads raised on high, jaws
opening and closing with a snap, grunting and roaring, while, with their
powerful muscular tails in violent vibration, they whipped the water
into foam.

There was consternation, with quick scampering among the riders of the
water-horses, who had been gaily skirmishing about, as was usual with
them at the start off.  Never did sailors bathing beside a becalmed ship
make quicker on board at the cry "Shark!" than made they to get upon the
rafts.

With loud cries of alarm, one and all together darted towards these, and
swarmed up, leaving the koker-logs to bob about below, or drift away
wherever the surge might carry them.  Nor were the rafters themselves
without fear, but rushed affrightedly about, the women and children
shrieking in chorus.  Even some of the men felt dismay at the fierce
bearing of the crocodiles, an incident altogether unexpected and new to
them.  Its very novelty made it the more alarming, from its cause being
a mystery.  But there was no time to speculate upon causes; the reptiles
were still advancing in menace, and steps needed taking to repel them.

Fire was at once opened on them, broadsides from both beams, and the
firing kept up, hot and fast as the guns could be loaded again.  Shot
after shot, and volley after volley was poured upon them, till the rafts
became shrouded in smoke, and the water around red with the blood of the
dead and wounded reptiles, that for a time seemed insensible to fear.
But at length it got the better of them; and, seeing nigh a dozen of
their number writhing in death throes, at last all turned tail, going
down to the bottom and staying there.

Continuing to ply poles and oars, the rafters reached the lower end of
the water sheet without encountering another crocodile, or even seeing
one.  There to get explanation of what had so puzzled them, by _finding
the river again run out_!



CHAPTER TWENTY.

THE KARL-KOP.

So was it; the water, once more gone underground, sank into the sand,
just as above.  Even worse than above, as regarded navigation, for an
exploring party sent forward, returned to report the channel dry to a
distance of at least ten miles, twice as far as before.

This made still more intelligible the great congregation of crocodiles.
They were the denizens of nigh twenty miles of the stream's length,
driven, by a long-continued drought, into such close companionship.
Crowded together, as frogs in a pond, they had devoured every fish,
every living thing dammed up along with them in the sheet of stagnant
water, and were famishing.  Hence their hostility and fearlessness of
man, due as much to hunger, as to any natural ferocity.

But the Vee-Boers thought no more about them now.  Enough was there to
occupy their minds in this second obstruction that had arisen, and which
vexed them more than the first, their leader far more--to him a very
chagrin--as he reflected on his want of forethought.  He should not have
been satisfied with such a short, careless reconnaissance, but examined
the omaramba to the farthest end, wherever that might be.  Resolved to
act with more prudence in this second exploration, he had taken charge
of it himself, nor turned back, till assured of the stream's re-issue
and onward flow without any other interruption.

This assurance had been obtained by discovering that the sandy tract
they were traversing was but a belt of some ten or twelve leagues in
breadth, beyond which the nature of the country was different, the
surface-soil being firm and clayey.  Rivers running over a bed of clay
do not go underground, and there was no fear of a third obstruction, at
least of that special kind.  These facts were not all ascertained in a
few hours, nor yet in a single day.  Two, and part of a third, were
spent in the exploration.

While it was in progress, those left behind had remained inactive, as
there was nothing for them to do.  Should there be no more stream, there
could be no further navigation, and again taking the rafts to pieces
would be so much labour lost.  In this uncertainty, even their lading
was left undisturbed; only such chattels carried on shore as were needed
for a camp of temporary occupation.  Nor did any of the people, white or
coloured, elect to sleep on land, having by this time discovered the be
a better place.  Upon it they were less exposed to the torture of
mosquitoes, to avoid which, the rafts were each night drawn out to some
distance from the beach, and there brought to anchor.  So shoal was it
all round, they had no difficulty in communicating with the shore
whenever desirable.

It was an interval of great anxiety, full of doubts and apprehensions.
Not all dulness, however, as the monotony of their life was now and then
varied by episodes of a curious kind--scenes and incidents of nature,
such as may be witnessed only in her wild, untrodden domain.  One which
occurred on the evening after their arrival was of this character--
indeed, so strange as to test the reader's credulity.  Yet is it here
chronicled as a fact, on the authority of trustworthy witnesses, the
adventurers themselves.

It had got to be near sunset; the people all on shore, and seated at the
nacht-maal, when a swishing and crackling among the trees close by,
admonished them of some large quadruped making its way towards the
water.  It might be buffalo, rhinoceros, or hippopotamus; but, judging
from the volume of sound, more likely an elephant.  And an elephant it
was, as was soon seen; one of the largest size, and a Karl-kop, in other
words, a tuskless bull.  Alone was he, which proclaimed him an outcast
from elephantine society--an Ishmaelite in his own land.

All this indicated danger, as they watching him well knew.  For the
solitary male elephant is vicious beyond conception, being absolutely
insane, or _musty_ as it is termed in India.

He was approaching the water, presumably to quench his thirst, and in a
few more strides stood upon its edge, not fifty yards from the spot
where the people were sitting, luckily behind some bushes that screened
them from his sight.  They were not all seated now, however, as several
of the young Boers had sprung upon their feet, and were hastening to get
hold of their guns.  Some already had them in hand, but delayed opening
fire, a word from baas Rynwald restraining them.  A caution it was in
view of the risk to be run.  For, should they fail to kill the bull at
once, and only wound and infuriate him, then would they all be at his
mercy.  Besides, he was only a Karl-kop, an aged one, and not worth
powder and ball.  These admonitions were spoken in a whisper, nor was
there any noise made otherwise, lest the elephant should hear and strike
off in retreat, or, what was just as likely, charge into their midst.
But the caution was acted upon, and not a shot fired; instead, silence
preserved by one and all, so profound that the rustling of a leaf might
have been heard from afar.  There was not a breath of air stirring at
the time, and the water was still and smooth as a mirror.

By this the old bull had entered it, and they now saw that something
besides thirst had brought him thither.  He drank, too, till satisfied,
his first performance.  After which, wading a stride or two farther in,
he proceeded to give himself a shower-bath, drawing the water into his
trunk, and blowing it out again upwards, so that it fell over his back
in spray as from a whale-spout.  For some five minutes had he been thus
sprinkling himself, when he was seen all at once to start, pluck his
proboscis out of the water, and, uttering a cry as of rage and pain,
wheel back towards the beach.

What the cause of this unexpected demonstration was, the spectators
could not tell.  Amid the eddies he had raised, with floating froth and
bubbles, nothing was observable to explain it.  And the Karl-kop himself
seemed equally ignorant of it, for, on reaching dry land, he faced round
again, and stood regarding the spot he had so abruptly abandoned with a
puzzled, mystified air.

Only for a few seconds stood he thus, when his little eyes began to
sparkle with a peculiar intelligence, his ears giving indication of the
same by a satisfied flap or two, as much as to say, "Now I know what did
it."  Then, as if determined to have his bath out, he strode back into
the water, till nearly knee-deep, and once more plunged his proboscis
underneath.  But his design was all different, as the spectators were
soon made aware by seeing a ripple on the surface of the water, a moving
furrow as from the dorsal fin of a shark, but which they knew to be
caused by a crocodile.  And a crocodile it was; one of small size, not
over six or seven feet in length.  But surely the same that had made a
snap at the elephant's trunk, inflicting a wound which, though slight,
was enough to account for that angry scream, with the action
accompanying.

Many tales have been told of the sagacity of elephants, and many
instances recorded, truthful too.  But, perhaps, never one affording
better proof of it, and certainly none stranger, than that the Vee-Boers
were witnesses of there and then.  Standing still, with trunk partly
submerged, the great pachyderm kept the long, flexible feeler in
constant, but gentle oscillation, playing its tip horizontally from side
to side, as an angler his fly, or mock-minnow.

The bait took almost instantly.  Scarce a minute had elapsed, ere the
crocodile, drawing close up, under the surface, cautiously, made a
second attempt to seize it.  This time to get seized itself, and jerked
out of the water, as if it had been but a sprat.  Then the elephant
again facing shoreward, strode out, still holding it in his trunk with
octopus-like clasp, more than one lap of the gristly tube being around
it.  High in air was the reptile raised, to be hoisted yet higher, as
soon as the Karl-kop set foot on land.

For it was tossed up into a tree, and fell in a fork between two
branches, elastic boughs, that, closing upon it, held it as in a vice,
despite all its writhings and wrigglings!

The spectators affirm that the elephant flung it into that particular
crotch, with a foreknowledge of the result, though I myself rather think
that the deposition was a thing of chance.

From that high eminence the ugly creature never came down, though a
bullet, afterwards sent into it in mercy, brought its struggles to an
end.

But before this, the Karl-kop had been permitted so depart in peace,
without a shot fired at him, young Boers and all now desirous that he
should go unscathed.  Recalling the scare which the crocodiles had given
them, they looked upon him in the light of an ally and avenger.  So that
without seeing, or having any suspicion of the danger so near him, he
went away back upon the same spoor, to continue his lonely life and
wanderings.



CHAPTER TWENTY ONE.

AFLOAT ON THE LIMPOPO.

A broad river coursing eastward for the Indian Ocean, nearly in the
latitude of the Tropic of Capricorn.  Drifting down it is a large raft,
with many people upon it, and that which, seen from a distance, might be
taken for three trek-waggons.  On nearer view, however, these are
discovered to be but waggon--tilts, supported on upright posts instead
of wheels.  Needless to say, they are the same which have been all along
sheltering our party of migrating Boers, and the river the Limpopo;
while the large raft is a composite structure of the three small ones
lashed and braced together, with some additional timbers to give it
greater size and strength.  The original beams of koker-boom had been
carried across the second portage, put together as before, and brought
on down the branch stream, without encountering any other interruption.
On reaching its mouth, however, it was deemed better to continue the
voyage with the three united in one, and the union has been made.  In
the new arrangement the waggon-tilts still hold position on the
quarter-deck, side by side and parallel to one another; while only one
of the steering-oars--the central one--is retained.  The sheds are also
re-erected on the fore-deck, with the cargo collected into one pile, and
instead of three fire-hearths, a single one now serves for all.  With
the thermometer often at 100 degrees in the shade it is not there for
warmth, but culinary needs.

There are still a half-score of the water-horses attached, but now in
tow astern, and with no one bestriding them.  Nor have they been much
ridden since that great crocodile scare; all along the branch stream,
thence downward, the reptiles being in such numbers, and so fiercely
disposed, as to make it unsafe.  The horses, however, have been retained
to meet certain emergencies, as when quick communication with the banks
may be necessary or desirable.  But there is now another tender
attached, of quite a different kind; a canoe full twenty feet in length,
with a beam's breadth of about five, capable of holding a crew of eight
or ten.  It is of the "dug-out" pattern, hollowed from a single trunk,
the handicraft of the Imacobas.

All this occupied time, more than a fortnight having been spent in the
work of remodelling and reconstruction, the scene of operations being
inside the embouchure of the tributary.  During that period the people
were, of course, compelled to live on land, and there passing sleepless
nights, through the torment of mosquitoes, they are glad to get out upon
the bosom of the broad river, where but few of these persecutors will
follow them [Note 1].

As the re-embarkation has been just effected, they are as yet uncertain
how the new craft will behave.  But with the buoyant koker-booms holding
it high in the water, its gives promise of good "floating" qualities,
which has put all on board into the best of spirits.  Besides, they are
again experiencing that exquisite sense of pleasure derived from motion
without toil, with the added delight of ever-changing scenes.  The tract
of country they are now traversing is different from any they have yet
passed over; a vast level plain, with no mountain, not even a hill,
visible on either side; treeless to a far distance, the only vegetation
near being tall grass and reeds, with here and there on the higher
stretches of bank a thin scattering of bushes, chiefly acacias.  At a
different period of the year, most of the land in sight would be under
water--inundated.  Even now portions of it are marsh, though it is the
season of drought, and the river at its lowest.  Yet is there no lack of
animal life, birds especially abounding; birds of largest size and
endless variety of species.  Standing balanced on one leg, or leisurely
winging through the air, can be seen the "Wattled" and "Blue" cranes;
while on some bit of smooth sand beach may be witnessed that curious
spectacle, "Caffre" cranes [Note 2], dancing a quadrille, with wings
extended and waving about, as the gauzy skirts of ladies in a ball-room.
Not far off, but solitary, is the great "Goliath heron," as also the
white egret, two kinds of flamingoes, and storks of several species;
among these the gigantic "Adjutant" [Note 3], whose beak, like a
pick-axe when pointed upward with neck at full stretch, will reach to
the height of a man's head.  Affrighted from their watery rest, flocks
of wild geese and ducks fly to and fro; while the ostriches and great
"Kori" bustards go stalking over the plain, or, approaching the river's
bank, stand gazing at the raft, half in wonder, half alarmed.  High in
the heaven's above are vultures of various kinds; also eagles, kites,
and others of the falcon tribe, each soaring in its own curve, with eyes
on the _qui vive_ for quarry below.

Nor are quadrupeds scarce; instead plenteous, both in number and
species.  Here and there a hippopotamus appears swimming about in the
river, or but for a moment showing its clumsy head, with thick truncated
muzzle above the surface as it rises to breathe; then going under again
to leave a large eddy with floating froth and bubbles.  Now and then a
rhinoceros comes crashing through the reeds by the river's edge on its
way to drink, while troops of quaggas, zebras, and antelopes, the last
varied in size and sort, roam over the veldt beyond.

But the spectacle most interesting of all was one afforded by the
largest of quadrupeds--the elephant itself; a sight so rare as to well
deserve being called wonderful; and so the old jager, Jan Van Dorn,
pronounced it--even he never having witnessed the like before.

During the time they were engaged in raft-building, they had observed
elephants on the opposite side of the great river; not a single herd,
but straggling bands all moving in the same direction--downward.  Day
after day they had noticed this stream of the great pachyderms,
supposing them to be the same animals that had returned up in the night,
and were thus journeying to and fro for food, or water.

Now they had evidence to the contrary, and in less than an hour after
embarking.  As they passed down, with eyes scanning the plain on both
sides of the river, they arrived opposite a wide expanse of wet marsh,
or savanna, extending away from the right bank.  On this was a herd of
elephants, a multitude so vast as to seem all of the elephant kind
inhabiting South Africa.  The ground was thick covered and black with
them for miles upon miles, the whole drove certainly numbering not less
than a thousand head!  They were up to their bellies browsing on a green
sedge--that grew luxuriantly in the wet marshy soil--no doubt the cause
of their being so congregated.

To the young Boers it was a sight not less tantalising than strange, and
their elders had a difficulty in restraining them.  One and all were for
bringing the raft in to the bank, landing, and making slaughter among
the pachyderms.  But the old jager in command would not listen to this;
knowing as he did, that the first shot fired would send the herd
helter-skelter, even should they stand to receive a first shot.

Besides, he urged another and more convincing objection.  To stalk such
game on that ground, bare of trees and other protecting cover, would be
attended with the greatest danger.  Instead of retreating, just as
likely might they charge upon the stalkers, and put them to flight, with
scarce a chance of escape.

In fine, the elephants were let alone, though not without sore
reluctance on the part of the young hunters.  Even the baases disliked
it; for it seemed almost as the leaving behind some thousands of pounds
of ivory, with as many hundreds of pounds sterling.  But it had to be
done; the uncertainty, with peril attendant, determining the sacrifice.

And there was still another factor which just then interfered.  The
raft, hitherto gliding smoothly on at a fair rate of speed, had been
found to be gradually slowing, and was now scarce making way at all.
The cause was clear enough.  Up to this point, or rather _down_ to it,
they had been carried along on the current of the inflowing stream,
which here came to an end amid the more sluggish waters of the great
river.

By Jan Van Dorn this new and unexpected impediment was looked upon with
something more than vexation--indeed alarm--the wiser ones sharing it.
Before them were long leagues of river navigation; how many they could
not tell, or what time it might take to reach the sea.  But they knew
there was also a rainy season before them, during which the low-lying
coast-land becomes a hotbed of malarial fever, almost always fatal to
white men.  No wonder then at their dreading delay.

It seemed a poor alternative, taking to oars; but they had hopes of
again getting into a current farther down, and so took to them.  Poling
they did not think of now; as, despite the river being at its lowest, it
was too deep for that.  But there were oars in plenty, with men to man
them; so out went they, to be worked with a will.

Notwithstanding, their progress was unsatisfactory, the cumbrous
structure refusing to move at a speed of much more than a mile to the
hour.  And as still further discouragement a long reach of the river--
leagues of it--stretched before them, straight as a canal, and to all
appearance as stagnant.  But this, at first dispiriting, after a little
became suggestive.  If in directness of course the stream resembled a
canal, either of its banks--smooth, firm, and level as they were--might
be likened to a tow-path.

Why should they not try towing?  Just the idea that occurred to baas Van
Dorn; to be acted upon without an instant's delay.  Quick as it could be
done, the old waggon trek-trouws were spliced together, one end made
fast to the raft, and the other carried ashore, with a score of
Hottentots and Caffres to do the towing.  Which commenced amid a chorus
of encouraging cries; and soon the huge, heavy craft, with constantly
increasing speed, was "walking the water like a thing of life."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  If a wide river, mosquitoes are rarely found far from the bank.
Along the water's edge is their favourite haunt, especially where
wooded.

Note 2.  The "Wattled" crane (_Grus carunculata_).  The "Blue" crane of
the South African colonists is that better known to naturalists as the
Stanley crane (_Anthropoides Stanleyanus_).  The "Caffre" crane is the
beautiful species with coronetted head (_Balearica Regulorum_); called
also "Crowned" crane, and sometimes "Balearic" from its being an
inhabitant of the Balearic Isles.

Note 3.  The Adjutant, or, as more commonly called, "Adjutant bird"
(_Ciconia Argali)_, belongs to the family of storks, of which South
Africa possesses no less than seven distinct species.  The species of
_Ardeinae_ or Herons, are there even much more numerous, there being
fifteen of them including true herons, egrets, and bitterns.



CHAPTER TWENTY TWO.

LEGS EASILY BROKEN.

The towers had advanced but a very short way when an incident arose,
illustrating a strange ornithological fact--indeed, so strange as to
seem apocryphal.  While pulling onward with shouts and laughter, they
saw before them two large birds, which all knew to be _Slangvreters_
[Note 1],--easily recognisable as such by their slender bodies, thick
aquiline beaks, and long stilt-like legs.  But still more, by the spike
of plumelets growing out of their crowns with a backward slant; which,
from a fancied resemblance to the old-fashioned quill-pen stuck behind
the ear of clerk or scrivener, has earned for them the more common title
of "Secretary birds."  When first observed, they were out on the open
veldt serpent-hunting.  One had even seized a large green snake, borne
it aloft into the air, and was in the act of dashing it to the ground,
where the other, with outstretched neck and vibrating wings, was waiting
to pounce upon it.  They were but a little out of the way of the towers,
who expected to see them drop the snake, and retreat further, or carry
it away.  They did drop the snake, but instead of making off, drew
nearer with a rush, half running, half flying; nor stopped they till
close up, and direct on the path the towing party must take.  Not to
remain at rest there, but with continued fluttering around a mimosa-bush
that grew upon the bank--all the while screaming affrightedly.

There was no mystery about their behaviour, strange as it appeared.  Its
cause was declared by cries, a sort of guttural rattling, which came
responsive out of the mimosa, where a nest was now descried with young
in it.  It was an immense cluster of sticks loosely put together,
through which the long legs of the two young secretaries--for there was
but a pair--hung dangling down.  By this the towers were beside it, and
a scramble ensued to get hold of the chicks, the old birds having at
length despairingly forsaken them, though still tarrying near.  But the
youngsters were not to be caught so easily.  Nearly full-fledged and
grown, before hand could be laid on either, they bolted out of the nest,
and struck off in run over the veldt, flapping their wings to assist
them.  Half a dozen of the men followed, eagerly bent on capture.  For
the slangvreter is a favourite pet with the South African Dutch; often
tamed and kept as a protector of the poultry-yard.  But notwithstanding
the swiftness of some of their pursuers, the young secretaries, running
like ostriches, would doubtless have escaped, but for an accident
depriving them of the use of their limbs.  Traversing the line of their
retreat was a fissure in the ground, and into it both tumbled head
foremost, from their eyes being all on the pursuers behind.  It was a
dry rain-gulch, so shallow, it seemed as though the birds might easily
have got out again, and continued on.  So could they, and would, had
their legs but held good, which they did not.  Instead the young
secretaries lay struggling at the bottom of the gulch; and when taken
up, it was found that one had both legs broken, the other a leg and a
wing!

Their captors thought little of this, knowing it a thing of common
occurrence, and that the legs of young slangvreters are so brittle as
often to snap in twain--even from a fall on level ground, if the birds
be alarmed, and started suddenly into a run.

The captives were taken on board the raft; but, as it was known that
their broken limbs could not be set again, they were humanely killed, to
save them from a lingering death.  But compassion had to undergo a still
greater trial, at sight and hearing of the parent birds, as they flew
frantically around the now untenanted nest, uttering shrill plaintive
cries.  But the Caffres and Hottentots, callous to pity, made light of
their anguished demonstrations; and, hoisting the tow-rope over the
mimosa-bush, once more bent themselves along it, and treked on, mirthful
and boisterous as ever.

They had not proceeded much farther, however, before encountering
another incident, of a less pleasant nature, as though meant to rebuke
and punish them for their unfeeling behaviour.  With the sun high up in
a cloudless sky, the atmosphere had become hot as the inside of a
glass-house; so sultry as soon to put an end to their merry caperings.
Instead of jumping about, and playing tricks on one another, they were
now contented to move soberly and slowly along--even letting the
tow-rope drag the ground.  The thick hawser of raw hide was no light
weight in itself, to say nothing of the huge thing that needed pulling
along.

Jan Van Dorn, with others upon the raft, began to chafe at the slow
progress they were making; the baas at length calling out to them to
mend their pace.  As he spoke commandingly, expecting obedience, what
was his surprise to see them drop the tow-rope as if it had been a bar
of red-hot iron, and at the same time recommence capering about!  But
their antics were now of a different kind, both legs and arms in violent
agitation, as though one and all had become suddenly afflicted with the
malady of Saint Vitus!  Their voices, moreover, had quite a different
tone; no more in jest or laughter, but cries and exclamations betokening
pain.  So shouting, and wildly gesticulating, some ran out on the open
veldt, others to and fro along the bank.  But most of them made a rush
down to the river, and plunging in, swam off for the raft.  Not till
they were close up to it, did the cause of their debandade become known
to those on board; then by their seeing over the head of each swimmer a
swarm of insects easily recognisable as bees.  Each had his own escort
of them; the bees infuriated, and spitefully buzzing, as at intervals
they darted down to inflict their stings.  All was understood now.  The
trailing hawser had caught upon a hive, to make wholesale ruin of it;
and the incensed insects were taking revenge for the destruction of
their honeyed store.

As the swimmers came on, it was seen that the Caffres, protected by
their thick lanigerous mops, suffered least; while the Hottentots, with
scantier covering of wool, had to keep constantly ducking their heads
under water.

All this was highly provocative of mirth to the people on the raft, and
most of them were now in convulsions of laughter.  But not long to
continue it; scarce a minute more, till they had convulsions of another
and very different kind.  For soon as the retreating towers climbed upon
deck, the bees, forsaking them, attacked every one indiscriminately--
white, black, and yellow all the same.  The shouts and gesticulations,
heard and seen hitherto, were nothing to compare with the racket that
arose now.  Women shrieked as they rushed in under the canvas tilts,
tugging their children after, all in wild hullabaloo; while the young
Boers leaped about, arms up and buffeting the air, as so many Don
Quixotes fighting imaginary windmills.  Even the trio of grave,
phlegmatic baases were forced to take part in the grotesque saltatorial
performance!

Nor was it so soon over, but kept up for nigh twenty minutes' time; till
the last bee got killed, or driven from the raft.  But before this could
be done, scarce anybody escaped without a sting; some of the towers
first attacked having eyes "bunged up," and features so swollen as to be
well-nigh obliterated.  Neither was this the worst, or at least the
whole of it.  For in addition to the physical pain, there was a mental
one.  They had heard of a species of bee, inhabiting that very part of
Africa, whose sting is poisonous, resulting in certain death.  No wonder
at their apprehensions being keen, even to torture.  Nor did they get
over them, with full confidence restored, for days after; not till the
swelling had gone down, and all suspicious symptoms disappeared.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  The Secretary Bird (_Serpentarius reptilivorus_) called
_Slangvreter_ (snake-eater) by the Boers.  It is held in high esteem by
the South African colonists, on account of its services as a destroyer
of reptiles; and there is even a heavy fine, imposed by law, for killing
one of these birds.



CHAPTER TWENTY THREE.

HIPPOPOTAMUS HUNTING.

While the battle with the bees was progressing upon the raft, the same
enemy was being fought on the bank by the towers who had stayed there;
seven or eight of whom could not swim.  Some of these had leaped into
the river, where they saw it was not of a depth to drown them, the rest
running off over the veldt.  Equally ludicrous was the behaviour of both
parties.  They in the water having waded in, deep as was safe, there
stopped.  But as the bees followed, and were still buzzing about their
heads, they had to keep ducking under water, bobbing up and down, as
boys in their first essays at diving.  Those who remained on land rushed
wildly hither and thither, at intervals bounding up like springboks, all
the while sawing the air with their arms to an accompaniment of dolorous
cries.  It was some time before the towing could be resumed, every one
busy doing his best to allay the pain from stings received.  But as the
raft had now nigh come to a stop, the voice of the head baas was once
more raised in command; the hawser fished up out of the water, and again
taken ashore; then a detail of fresh hands following to man it, the
towage was continued as before.

But the rope was no longer allowed to trail.  Heavy though it was, and
still hot the sun, care was taken to keep it clear of the ground, with a
sharp look-out for bees' nests; several others that were encountered
being given a wide berth.

Fortunately for all, this toilsome trek did not need to be of long
duration.  At the lower end of the straight reach there was a bend in
the river, rounding which they once more caught the current in strength
sufficient to carry the raft briskly along.  So the towers were called
back on board; the hawser drawn on deck, and stowed away in a coil for
future service of a similar kind, should it be required.

The rafters were just beginning to congratulate themselves on the
smooth, easy gliding again, with a satisfactory rate of speed, when they
observed that this last was gradually increasing.  But not slowly;
instead, with a rapidity to give them cause for apprehension.  It was a
change from one extreme to the other, a revulsion of feeling sudden as
complete.  But an hour before they had been chafing at still water; now
did they as little like it running--their minds filled with a fear of
rapids below.

Just such there proved to be; a chain of them, one succeeding another,
for the next twenty leagues of the river's course.  It was where the
land surface sloped down from the high plateau of the interior to the
low-lying belt of the coast.  But luckily by a gentle incline; had there
been any abrupt escarpment, a cataract in the stream would have been the
consequence, and possibly the raft gone over it, so bringing the
adventures of our Vee-Boers, with their lives, to a termination, there
and then.

As it was, they encountered no waterfall, only rapids; which, by a
dextrous use of the poles, with one or other of the Macobas all the time
at the steering oar, they succeeded in safely running.  It was often a
close shave though, with wreckage imminent more than once.  Once,
indeed, the raft grounded upon a subaqueous reef, and threatened going
to pieces.  But what with the buoyant koker-booms, the reliable lashings
of Baavian-touw, and the skill of the Lake Figam boatmen, it was got off
again without serious damage.

Rejoiced were all when at length assured that the last of the turbulent
rushes had been run, and they were once more in a tranquil current, with
the assurance of its extending to a far distance beyond them.  They had
this confidence from the changed character of the stream, and the
scenery on its banks.  It now coursed through flat, alluvial land, on
both sides wooded to the water's edge; the trees of great height, and
broad leaved, with that lush luxuriance of underwood only found in
tropical forests.

Thenceforward it was all plain sailing, and easy; though the steerers
had a hard enough task, and required to be continuously at it.  For the
stream was now winding, often nigh back upon itself like the letter S,
and at times near to being as the figure 8.  Here, again, it was too
deep for polling, but neither were the oars resorted to.  Without them
the raft made way averaging a league to the hour, and with this all were
contented.  The Boers of South Africa, as their ancestors by the Zuyder
Zee, take things easily.  Besides, the rainy season would not set in for
another month, and in less than half that time, barring accidents, they
should reach the reported Portuguese settlement by the river's mouth.
Thence, getting out to sea, they would escape the fever danger.

Thus reliant, they allowed the raft to glide on, giving it no aid of
oars, save the steering one, at which the two Macobas took turn and turn
about, having all the work to do.  The rest of the people did little or
nothing, though the young Boers were busy enough.  But with sport, not
work; their activity consisting in a display of shooting skill.  Large
birds were all the time hovering overhead, or flying past--cranes,
pelicans, flamingoes, vultures, and eagles--and to bring one of these
down with a bullet was the feat on which bets were made.

Many so fell, and doubtless more would have fallen; but before they had
been long thus engaged, an order was issued for them to desist.  It came
from Jan Van Dorn, who had just conceived a grand economic scheme,
suggested by something he saw in the river.  This was a hippopotamus, or
rather several; for since leaving the foot of the rapids, numbers of
these amphibia had been observed, some waddling about upon the banks,
others swimming to and fro in the water, the cows with calves on their
backs; still others at rest on the surface as if asleep, with white
birds--a species of sea-gull--perched upon their shoulders.  Even those
moving about had each its quota of such perchers, now and then affording
an amusing spectacle, as the unwieldy quadrupeds sank under water,
forcing the birds to take wing with an odd air of bewilderment.  Not so
different was the behaviour of the quadrupeds themselves, as they saw
the raft bear down upon them, and go drifting by--a sight altogether new
to them.  They may have seen canoes, water-horses, and other
contrivances of river navigation in use among the natives, but never a
craft like that--never one of such monstrous dimensions.  And a monster
it must have appeared to them, as at intervals it belched forth flame
and smoke, accompanied by the loud reports of the roers.

With heads raised on high, the hippopotami responded to all this in loud
snorts, groans, and bellowing, more in astonishment than alarm.  There
was also a tone of defiance in it which gratified the ear of the old
jager, making known to him that he was in a river where these animals
had rarely, if ever, been hunted.  This meant money, should the
opportunity be taken advantage of, and he was not the man to let such a
chance slip.  Hence his having ordered the young Boers to cease firing
at the birds, the _zeekoes_ [Note 1] offering a mark better worth powder
and ball.  So, from that moment, not one was passed within shot-range
but had a bullet lodged in its body, and a second if the first failed to
kill it; sometimes a whole volley, when needed to make death sure.
Rarely was there a call for such wholesale expenditure of ammunition.
Most of them had slain zeekoes before, and knew the exact spot to aim
at; that most vulnerable being midway between eye and ear.  With
marksmen skilled as they, misses were rare; and the crack of a gun might
be taken as sounding the death-knell of a hippopotamus.

While engaged in this practice, they became witnesses of an odd
spectacle afforded by an old bull, which had been fired at and hit just
behind the ear, too far back to give him his death wound.  It seemed but
to drive him crazy; as he commenced spinning round and round on the
water, as a sheep in a pasture field, attacked by the "turn giddies."
But he was not permitted to make many gyrations, ere a volley from the
raft brought his spin to an abrupt termination, along with his life.

Thus, day after day, was slaughter made among the zeekoes, as the
rafters went on down the river.  Not wanton slaughter; but in pursuance
of that scheme of economy the head baas had got into his head, now
known, and approved of by his associates.  How could they help approval,
as they looked on a pile of hippopotamus teeth that lay on the raft's
deck, every hour growing bigger, each fresh pair added being as so much
money put into their pockets?

All this was satisfactory enough, but nothing to what awaited them
farther down.  As they drew near the coast, they came upon an islet
lying centrally in mid-stream, at a place where the river was more than
a mile in width.  They sighted it just before sunset; and, knowing the
night would be moonless and pitch dark, it was determined to bring-to at
the islet, and remain by it till morning.  So the raft's head was set
for it, without much change of course, as they had been already bearing
nearly straight down upon it.  When near, they saw it was selvedged with
tall reeds, of the kind called palmit, which, standing in the water,
formed a belt all round it, interrupted only at the upper end, where an
open list led into the firm dry land.  It was a sort of natural canal,
no doubt due to the water being there too deep for the palmits to get
root.  It was just wide enough to admit the raft; and without further
ado this was run into it, and "docked."

By this it was too dark for them to make out what lay beyond the
immediate proximity of their moorings, though the staging-plank was run
out, and some landed to ramble about a bit.  When morning came, it was
seen that the islet had an area of some eight or ten acres, all
grass-covered; and, strange to say, the grass all withered, though but a
foot or two above the level of the river's water.  Its brown colour
strikingly contrasted with the vivid green of the palmits forming its
periphery; and suggested a gorgeous picture-frame, from which the work
of the artist had been removed, leaving nought behind but the rough
backing of boards.  Neither tree nor bush grew upon it; their absence
indicating that it was subject to annual submergence in the season of
rain.

To all this, however, the rafters scarce gave a thought.  Nor would they
have bestowed a second glance on it, but for what they saw on the water
outside; this, an array of zeekoes, in such numbers that the surface was
literally flecked with them!  They were all around the islet, and over
the river, far as the verge of vision--certainly hundreds of them.  The
spectacle recalled the vast assemblage of elephants encountered higher
up; only that the great band of pachyderms were but visitors to the
place where they had been seen, while these of the water seemed either
to be permanent residents around the islet, or made it a sort of
rendezvous.

Here, then, was a grand opportunity for the Vee-Boers to complete the
scheme already in progress; in short, almost a certainty of making their
fortunes.  Nor did they hesitate about the steps that should be taken to
profit by it.  Instead, it was at once resolved to remain upon the
islet, till the ultimate moment when the rainy season might be expected
to commence, or the last zeekoe in that quarter be killed.

With like promptness did they enter upon execution.  Ere the setting of
another sun, the three waggon-tilts were again seen serving as tents,
set up in the centre and highest part of the islet--with two
hartebeest-houses, constructed of the palmit reeds beside them--while
the naked-bodied burden-bearers streamed to and fro between raft and
camp-ground, as the links of an endless chain.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  Zeekoe (Anglice, "sea-cow") is the name by which the
hippopotamus is known to the Dutch colonists of South Africa.  It is
just as inappropriate as that of "river-horse" (hippopotamus).



CHAPTER TWENTY FOUR.

TO SEA AND HOME.

Let the reader imagine a month to have elapsed since our migrant
graziers--for the time turned hippopotamus hunters--pitched their camp
on the river islet.  They are still in occupation of it; and proof that
they have chased the zeekoes to some purpose is seen all around.  Under
a capacious shed, some hundreds of the animals' teeth lie in heaps, as
horns in a tannery, and beside them many bunches of _jamboks_,
manufactured from the hides; while piles of _Zeekoe-speck_ [Note 1] and
bladders of fat rendered into lard, are heaped up everywhere.  During
all the month they have had a busy time of it; the young hunters killing
hippopotami, while the Hottentots and Caffres did the skinning,
whip-making, curing, and "trying out."

Tempted by a chase so profitable in results, and still yielding, they
had lingered till the last moment it might be safe.  Perhaps too long,
was the apprehensive thought of Jan Van Dorn, as one morning he waked up
to behold the sky overcast with inky clouds, at the same time hearing
the rumble of distant thunder.  It was the very morning they had fixed
upon for breaking up camp, and moving everything on board the raft.  But
as yet nothing had been stirred; waggon-tilts, hartebeest-houses,
sheds--with all the paraphernalia--standing or piled up as ever.

Neither was hand laid upon them that day, nor on the five days
following.  For before breakfast could be eaten, the far-off thunder had
come near, and was no longer heard in low muttering, but loud
reverberation; peal succeeding peal, as if all heaven's artillery had
opened fire over their heads.  Lightning flashed and forked athwart the
clouded firmament, from which fell rain, not in drops, but sheets--a
very swill of it.

Five days, and part of a sixth, did the downpour continue without
intermission, save in the nights.  But these being dark as Erebus,
nothing could be done in the way of transferring effects to the raft;
while during daylight so thick and blinding was the rain, that to keep
under shelter was the only thing thought of.

On the morning of the seventh day, the sky cleared again, and there was
a suspension of the storm.  But Jan Van Dorn and Smutz knew it would be
only temporary; since now, sure enough, the dreadful periodical rains
had set in.  So much the more reason for hastening departure from that
perilous spot.

As yet, however, their only fear was the fatal malarious fever, likely
to ensue.  But ere twenty minutes more had passed, they were made aware
of another danger hitherto unthought of.  Preliminary to moving their
_impedimenta_ on board the raft, the three baases had gone down to
inspect it, with a view to the storage of the cargo, now so much
augmented.  Never was visit of inspection shorter, or more perfunctory,
nor one with more abrupt ending.  In fact they could not get upon the
raft at all, as the inner end of the plank, that had rested on dry land,
was now several yards out in the water--bobbing up and down like a
float-stick.  There was no obscurity about the cause.  The river had
risen several feet; and, as they stood regarding it, they could see it
was still on the rise.  In another hour or two--possibly less--the whole
islet would be under water.

Whatever the reason for haste before, it was now more than doubled.
And, needless to say, all possible haste was made; a scene of activity
following, with hurrying to and fro.  Down came the waggon covers--
canvass, bamboos and all--to be rushed on board the raft, and there
dropped without waiting to set them up again; goods and chattels, all
the old effects with the new, getting transferred from camp to craft in
like expeditious manner.

Everything was on board by noon; and, as luckily no rain fell during the
rest of that day, they had all stowed snug before night, and were ready
to resume navigation; their last spell of it on that bottom of
koker-booms--so hoped they, and believed.

By earliest dawn of the next day the raft was cast loose from moorings,
and rowed out into the river clear of the islet.  Then went it floating
down, though with deck nearer the water-line than ever before.  But
this, instead of troubling those on board, only gave them gratification;
as might be gathered from the words of Jan Van Dorn, spoken after they
had got well under way.  Seated beside his two associates on sheaves of
jamboks, all three pipe in mouth, and eyes bent on the heaps of ivory,
zeekoe-speck, and lard, the head baas thus unburdened himself:--

"After all, brothers, it's not likely to turn out so bad for us.  Look
at these!" with a nod towards the varied spoils.  "If we can only get
them safe into the Durban market, they'll sell for enough to make good
all our losses.  Ay," he added, with a knowing wink, and a circular
flourish of his meerschaum, "with a trifle of profit besides; sufficient
to give us all a fresh start, and a good one, once we've treked back to
the Transvaal."

"Ya--ya!" was the laconic response of Blom and Rynwald; after which the
three sate smoking on in silence; only now and then interchanging grunts
of congratulation, as their eyes rested on the valuable commodities
heaped up around them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

It is pleasant having to record, that their hopeful anticipations were
realised, and to the letter.  On the third day after putting off from
the islet, the raft was tossing about in tidal water, where the river's
current met the inflowing surge of the sea.  And here again the
koker-booms behaved splendidly, bearing them well up and safe through
the conflict of waters--at length to lie cabled to a staunchion on the
wharf of the little seaport they had heard of, and which proved to be in
existence.

Nor did fortune forsake them there.  Instead, favoured them in their
finding a vessel at anchor in the port--a coast-trader bound down for
Natal.  Overjoyed was her skipper to take them on board; so many
passengers, who could well pay the passage-money, to say nothing of the
large amount of freight, giving him a full cargo.  It was just as if
they had chartered his vessel beforehand, and he had been awaiting them.

In fine, the wanderers by land and water got safe back to their point of
departure in the Transvaal, richer than they had ever been before.  Nor
did they leave it again, having no longer cause for expatriation.  For
soon after their return, ensued that strife usually called the
"Transvaal Rebellion," but by the Transvaalians themselves, the "War of
Independence."

How they won it at Laing's Nek, and the Spitz-kop, is well-known; and
among those who took part in that fierce, sanguinary fight, none bore
them more gallantly, or did greater execution with their long guns, than
the young Vee-Boers, whose travels and adventures are herein recorded.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  The thick layer of fat immediately under the skin of the
hippopotamus is esteemed a delicacy by the Boers, who call it, when
salted and cured, Zeekoe-speck, or bacon.  The jelly made from the feet
is also much prized, while the best kind of whips (jamboks) are those of
hippopotamus hide.  As is well-known, the teeth furnish an ivory of the
finest quality.

The End.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Vee-Boers, by Mayne Reid

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE VEE-BOERS ***

***** This file should be named 34667.txt or 34667.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/4/6/6/34667/

Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.